Many people find that frequent, systematic light cleaning has advantages over periodic upheaval. For one thing, the continuous
cleaning process is far easier on household surfaces. It minimizes
the need for scrubbing that causes unnecessary wear and tear on
wall, floor, and furniture finishes. In addition, dust on wooden surfaces, as well as on upholstery, draperies, and so forth, may be
easier to remove before it builds up and combines with other soil
such as body oils and tiny airborne droplets of cooking grease.
Frequent vacuuming will also minimize the need for professional
cleaning. Some find it easier to do a chore or two a day rather than
let tasks accumulate and become overwhelming.

PLANNING
Develop a list of all tasks that need to be done during the year and
group them under frequency headings-daily, weekly, monthly,
semiannually, and annually. It may be possible to budget your
time so that weekly chores are spread out over several days. For
people with weekday responsibilities other than cleaning, house
1

2

INTRODUCTION

maintenance must be on a catch-as-catch-can basis. But even
within the limits of available time, it's a good idea to plan to accomplish household tasks on a regular schedule.
What you clean and how often you clean depend upon your
personal preferences and tolerances. The following schedule is
meant as a guideline to suggest how a home can be cleaned with
well-defined tasks. Divide responsibilities among all family members. Make certain that everyone knows who does what and when.
Daily. Dishes should be washed, dried, and put away, and
kitchen counters wiped after each meal. Clean the kitchen sink
and wipe the range surfaces (including the microwave oven) once
a day or, even better, after each use. Picking up should become
second nature.
Weekly. Dust furniture and shelves; vacuum and, where applicable, brush upholstered furniture. Vacuum rugs and floors.
Clean under furniture and behind it. Damp mop the kitchen
floor. Empty wastebaskets. Wash bathroom basins, fixtures , and
floors. Dust radiators, woodwork, pictures, and mirrors. Wipe
window sills, and brush shades and blinds. Clean kitchen range
burners. Wipe the refrigerator and kitchen cabinet fronts. Polish
bright metal surfaces.
Monthly. Do one or more of the following special jobs in several
rooms on the same day: vacuum and, where applicable, brush
curtains and draperies. Wipe WQod trim and, where needed, wipe
walls and around doorknobs. Wash windows. Wash and, if necessary, wax the kitchen floor. Polish wood furniture and vacuum
upholstered furniture, paying special attention to cleaning under
cushions and in crevices between the back and the cushion
support. To prolong their life, turn over mattresses, end to end
and side to side, which will help equalize their wear. In hot
weather, clean air conditioner filters according to the manufacturer's recommendations.

INTRODUCTION

3

Seasonally or semiannually. Take inventory of the items in closets and drawers that are no longer useful. (The more clutter, the
harder it is to clean.) Rearrange clothes closets by season, hanging
clothes by type for easy access. Weed out unused clothing that can
be donated to appropriate agencies. Pack winter and summer
clothing where it will remain clean and free from moth damage
until needed again. (Dry-cleaning establishments commonly offer
free storage for items you bring them for cleaning.) Pack wool
clothing in cloth bags. This will allow the fiber to breathe and prevent moth damage. Wash mattress covers. Wash curtains and
draperies or have them dry cleaned. Dust the coils behind or underneath the refrigerator.
Annually. Have the furnace cleaned and tuned in late spring or
early fall. A central air-conditioning system arid room air conditioners should be checked for proper operation before the onset
of hot weather. Put power and hand gardening tools in good
order--cleaned, oiled, and greased-before storing them for the
winter. The same applies to snow removal equipment in the
spring. Shampoo carpets and rugs or have them cleaned professionally every 12 to 18 months.

EQUIPMENT AND STORAGE
If everything is kept organized, it will be easier for you to work
and you won't waste time looking for something when you need
it. If you live in a two- or three-story dwelling, it might be worth
the investment to duplicate supplies-such as vacuum cleanersso that you can have them on the same floor where they are used.
Keep special bathroom cleaning equipment and supplies in or
near the bathroom, if space permits.
Keep cleaning equipment as clean and dry as possible, so that
it's ready for the next use. Be sure that any enclosure where clean-

4

INTRODUCTION

ing materials are stored has ventilation holes in the door to allow
volatile materials to evaporate from cloths, sponges, and mops.
Brooms and brushes should not rest on their bristles. Hang them
to prevent premature wear and deformation that result in loss of
usefulness. Since cleaning products are often hazardous, make
sure the shelves on which they are stored are high enough to be
out of reach of young children.
Avoid cluttering a cleaning closet with rarely used supplies and
equipment. Keep a supply of paper vacuum-cleaner dust bags on
hand. Use the brand that is recommended for your particular vacuum; off-brand bags may not work well. You may also want to
stock spare sponge-mop refills, as well as a package or two of
hand sponges.
Good dust cloths can be made from cast-off soft cotton garments and bedding. Although they may be costlier to use-and
some might be less effective than cloth and harsh on some surfaces-some people find paper towels convenient. Cloths will
hold dust better if they are pretreated. A simple method is to put
a cloth into a screw-cap glass jar that has been coated on the inside with furniture polish. Put about two teaspoons of liquid polish into a container and turn it until a thin layer of polish covers
the inside surface. Let the cloth stand in the jar for a day or two.

ANOTHER SOLUTION
Housecleaning takes time and effort. One obvious way to escape
cleaning, although the solution can be expensive, is to employ a
qualified, reliable, and courteous home-cleaning service. Some
people use a professional service once or twice a year; others employ a cleaning person once a week or every two weeks or so. If
you decide to use professional help, ask for referrals from reliable

INTRODUCTION

5

neighbors and friends. If that fails, check the Yellow Pages under
Housecleaning. Always ask for and check references.
When negotiating with a prospective housecleaning provider,
be sure you both understand what is going to be done, how long
it will take, how much it will cost, and how frequently and on
what day of the week they'll provide the service. Be sure there is
an understanding of what cleaning materials and equipment they'll
bring and what you will have to make available. Tell them where
the items you're responsible for will be kept. Be sure the cleaning
provider regularly tells you when supplies are low so you can
stock up before their next visit.

HELPFUL HINTS
Few of us like to clean, but it is something we have to do, so why
not minimize the effort required. The following suggestions
should make the task of cleaning easier.
• It is not necessary to clean things that are not dirty. Sometimes,

all that is needed is a touch-up. You do not need to dry-clean
a suit when it only has to be aired, brushed, or pressed. If there
is a hand print on an otherwise perfectly clean mirror, don't feel
you have to clean the whole mirror; just attack the print.
• If you don't need or like something in your house, give it away,
dispose of it, or recycle it rather than having to clean it.
• Always clean from top to bottom. (Gravity carries dust down
onto lower surfaces.)
• Surfaces that you or your visitors can't see-r-like the top of a
cabinet-don't have to be cleaned regularly. Put some paper
down, and when it gets too dirty, pick the paper up and throw
it out.

6

INTRODUCTION

• If you're vacuuming in a large room, add a 25- to 50-foot extension cord to avoid the exasperation of having to stop and relocate the plug. Be sure the cord has the same power rating as
the vacuum.
• Place mats strategically at each entrance to collect dirt that
would otherwise be tracked in from the outside onto carpets
and floors. Encourage friends and family to wipe their feet before entering the house.
• Avoid any more walking back and forth than is absolutely necessary by gathering all the supplies you'll need for a particular
project and bringing them along with you at one time in a pailstyle organizer.
• Before using any new cleaning product or an old-standby product on a new item, be sure to spot-test it on an inconspicuous
part of the item for possible damage. Pretesting for possible
damage is especially important. It will be mentioned often
throughout this book.
• Store all household cleaning products in their original containers, with original labels intact so you'll be able to refresh your
memory with regard to directions for use, suggested precautions, and possible antidotes. Before using any new cleaning product, be sure to read the product's label carefully.
Product formulations can change, so it is also prudent to read
the labels on your old standby products before using a new
container.
• To replace a foam cushion taken from a zippered cover, place
the cushion in a plastic garbage bag and insert the bag openend first into the cover. Then, all you have to do is pull the bag
out, leaving the foam in place.
• Be careful when cleaning windows to avoid getting window
cleaner on adjacent painted surfaces, furniture, or carpeting and
damaging them.

INTRODUCTION

7

• Don't buy furnishings solely with aesthetics in mind. When
purchasing a carpet or piece of furniture, be sure to ask about
issues related to maintenance. Look for cleanability codes on
upholstered furniture. An "X" code means the piece 'cannot be
cleaned by any method other than vacuuming.
• Maximize lighting when cleaning or attempting to remove a
stain. That way you won't miss an important area that requires
your attention.
• If you plan to have your carpets or furniture cleaned professionally, be sure to remove pets and plants that might be affected by cleaning chemicals. Keep family members and' pets
out until everything is dry and you are given the "all clear" to
enter the area.

Dishes
DISHWASHER DETERGENTS

"Liquid gel" detergents solve the two major drawbacks of liquid
dishwasher detergents: the liquids tend to dribble out of the dishwasher's main wash cup yet tend to empty incompletely from their
containers, leaving a sizable amount unused. The gels are freeflowing and dispense completely from their containers.
The gels are better than powders at removing lipstick from
glasses and cups. But the powders are better than gels in overall
dishwashing, cleaning dried-on foods, and preventing washed off
foods from spotting and resoiling dishes.
While all the dishwasher detergents Consumers Union has
tested tend to discolor silver-plated flatware, after long exposure
powders tend to be slightly safer than gels in this regard. Powders
and gels both etch glassware when used in soft water. Typically,
damage to glassware is less likely in hard water. Powders and
most gels are safer to use on fine china with overglaze patterns
than they used to be years ago. However, it would be prudent to
hand wash fine china, silver, and crystal.
9

10

DISHES

COSTS

Store brands tend to be the cheaper products to use. Two powders not sold in stores-Shaklee Basic-D Concentrate and Amway
Crystal Bright--deserve special mention because of their extraordinarily high price and cost per load. Although both are excellent
in overall dishwashing, so are other, much-less-expensive powders.
ENVIRONMENrAL EFFECTS

Most dishwasher detergents contain phosphates. Phosphates help
dishwasher detergents do their job better, especially in hard water.
Over the years, manufacturers have worked on reducing the
amount of phosphates in dishwasher detergents, and a few have
been able to eliminate them altogether. But dishwasher detergents
with phosphates are still permitted everywhere.
RINSE AGENTS

In areas of the country with hard water, there is a more pro-

nounced tendency for spots or film to form on glassware and
dishes after a wash. If your dishwasher leaves spots or film,
change your brand of detergent or try a rinse agent. A rinse agent
is designed to lower the surface tension of water, causing it to
sheet off the dishes. This helps the dishwasher rinse away spots
and film.

DISHWASHERS
Most dishwashers offer some variation on the basic wash-rinsedry cycle. A dishwasher's Normal or Regular cycle typically includes two washes interspersed with two or three rinses. A Heavy
cycle can entail longer wash periods, a third wash, hotter water,

DISHWASHERS

11

or all of the above. A Light cycle usually includes just one wash.
These basic cycles are probably all that is needed. Additional
washing and drying options abound, necessary or not.
The common Rinse and Hold option can be useful for small
families. Instead of stacking dirty dishes in the sink or the dishwasher, you can gradually accumulate a full load, rinsing the
dishes as you go.
Don't expect a machine that offers a Pots and Pans cycle to do
the work that requires abrasive cleaners and elbow grease. And
think twice before subjecting good crystal or china--especially
sets with gold trim-to a dishwasher's China/Crystal setting. The
harsh detergents and possible jostling could etch or otherwise
damage fine china.
W/tSHING AND DRYING

Fancy electronic controls don't necessarily translate into better
cleaning. Most machines, electronic or not, work pretty well overall. Most machines also use their water-heating element to dry the
dishes; some have a blower or a separate duct-mounted heater.
Whatever the method, your machine should do an excellent job of
drying china and glasses. Drying flatware is a bit more .demanding
for some.
No-heat air drying, which utilizes evaporation and heat retained
from the wash, produces reasonably dry dishes provided you can
wait a few hours. You may be able to speed up drying by propping open the door.
ENJc.'RGY AND NOISE

If you don't rinse dishes before you load-and you needn't-a
dishwasher actually uses no more water than hand washing with
a double sink. In fact, a dishwasher uses less water than if you

12

DISHES

washed dishes under a running faucet. The machines themselves
use a small amount of electricity, consuming between 0.6 and 1.4
kilowatt-hours of electricity when supplied with 120°F water,
which ~orks out to between 5 and 12 cents of electricity at average power rates. No-heat drying saves a penny or two.
Heating water to feed the dishwasher accounts for the bulk of
its energy costs. An electric water heater will consume about 12
cents of electricity to provide the 9 gallons of 120°F water typically
used for one load; the total comes to about $45 a year, assuming
you run the dishwasher once a day. The hot-water cost for a gasor oil-fired heater will be about 4 cents a load, or a total of about
$15 a year.
Quiet operation has become a dishwasher's main selling point,
second only to washing performance and durability. Dishwashers
have become quieter over the years.
SAFETY

All models have a safety interlock that will turn off the power
when the door is opened. All models have a float switch, which
senses accidental overfilling and also cuts power.
Many dishwasher accidents involve people cutting themselves,
usually on knives or forks as they reach over a flatware basket into
the machine's dish rack. It's always a good idea to load flatware
with their points down. In addition, a machine's heating element
can inflict a serious burnl Make sure that the appliance has cooled
before you reach into the bottom of the tub to clean a filter or retrieve an item that has dropped.
Door vents, often at a toddler's eye level, can emit steam,
so keep children away while the dishwasher is running. Some
electronic models have a hidden touchpad that locks the controls
to discourage children from playing with them-a worthwhile
feature.

HAND

DISHWASHING LIQUIDS

13

DISHWASHER RELIABIliTY

Some of the more reliable brands, based on the experiences of
Consumer Reports readers with dishwashers bought new since
1987, have been Magic Chef, Whirlpool, Hotpoint, Amana,
General Electric Monogram, and General Electric. Frigidaire,
Tappan, and White-Westinghouse dishwashers were most frequently reported as having needed repairs.

HAND

DISHWASHING LIQUIDS

Hand dishwashing liquids are formulated to facilitate removal of
greasy soil from dishes (glasses, plates, utensils, pots, etc.). They
also suspend (~mulsify) the soil in the wash water to facilitate rinsing. Although a hand dishwashing liquid does not have to produce
any meaningful amount of suds to be effective at removing soil,
suds stability has become accepted (rightly or wrongly) as an indication of a product's remaining cleaning power.
Consumers Union surveyed staff members regarding their dishwashing habits. The respondents reported using one or more of
the following methods. In fact, many of the respondents reported
using all three methods.
• Squirt a quantity of hand dishwashing liquid into a sink, dishpan, or equivalent before or during the process of filling it with
water. Then clean the dishes using a sponge, brush, plastic
scrubbing pad, or dishcloth.
• Squirt some detergent into the dish and wash it using a sponge,
brush, plastic scrubbing pad, or dishcloth.
• Squirt some detergent directly onto a sponge, brush, plastic
scrubbing pad, or dishcloth, which is then used to. wash the
dishes.

14

DISHES

THE PRODUCTS

Most products have pull-up dispensing tops. Some have snap-top
dispensing caps or screw caps without dispensers. The 22-fluidounce size is commonly used. However, many products come in
larger sizes, and ultraconcentrated versions come in smaller containers. Most containers have contoured shapes, presumably for
ease of gripping.
Hand dishwashing liquids may contain alcohol to keep the surfactants dissolved; alcohol may irritate some individuals' hands.
They may also contain fragrances, preservatives, and colorants,
which can also irritate.
PRODUCT PERFORMANCE

Most test methods for hand dishwashing liquids are based entirely
on the products' ability to sustain a head of foam in hard water
while challenged by soiled plates. The number of plates that hand
dishwashing liquids will wash before the suds are depleted varies
from product to product and is affected by water hardness, In
Consumers Union testing, several well-known national brands
washed more than 12 plates in both hard and soft water. Most of
the brands will not do much worse.
But suds stability is not the most important characteristic of
good hand dishwashing liquids. Their primary function is to facilitate the rt;moval of greasy soil. Hand dishwashing liquids do not
remove soil by themselves, especially carbonized (burned on)
food residues (e.g., the fat in a broiler pan), which can be difficult. They help loosen and emulsify the soil so you can more easily remove it with some amount of elbow grease and the help of
a dish cloth, sponge, steel wool, or plastic scrubbing pad.
Typically, the hand dishwashing liqUids Consumers Union
tested were more effective at removing greasy soil in hard water
than in soft water. They were very good to excellent in hard water,

HAND DISHWASHING LIQUIDS

15

whereas the best products were only very good in soft water.
(Most were merely good.) However, some were not much better
than using only hot water-which is not very good at all.
In hard water, the better products (especially the ones with the
best suds stability) might be slightly more difficult to rinse than
most of the others. In soft water the differences are less significant.
Many Consumers Union staff members reported that they never
use protective gloves when they clean dishes, whereas 22 percent
use them some of the time. Although most of those who never
wear gloves or wear them only some of the time reported that
they had not experienced any skin irritation, about 20 percent had.
Contrary to claims that some products attack grease but not skin
oils, the surfactants in all hand dishwashing liquids will remove
natural oils from the skin. Accordingly, none of these products will
actually be beneficial for your hands. But some products are less
harsh than others. Consumers Union found the best "natural"
brands to be almost as mild as baby shampoo. Whereas most
products tested were at least as mild as an adult shampoo, a few
might be more irritating to some people's hands.
DOSE

Very few products provide the user with any definitive dose information. In fact, several tell the user to employ "one firm
squeeze." To see what a "squeeze" might deliver, Consumers
Union staff members were asked to show how much hand dishwashing liquid they would squeeze into a sink or dishpan. The results varied from less than 1 gram to about 25 grams. Thus,
instructions to use a "firm squeeze" to dispense hand dishwashing
liquid do not provide enough information for proper dose control.
RECOMMENDATIONS

If you normally use a hand dishwashing liquid to clean a few

16

DISHES

lightly soiled dishes like milk or soft drink glasses, soup bowls or
sandwich plates, it may be best to apply a few drops of the product to a dishcloth or sponge and refresh it as needed. However, if
you wash a sink full of dishes, start with a dilute solution (about
one tablespoon of hand dishwashing liquid for every three to four
gallons of water). If this does not do an adequate cleaning job,
add more. To clean heavily soiled pots, pans, and dishes, you'll
need a product with the ability to effectively emulsify the grease
and loosen the tough soil, thereby making the scrubbing job as
easy as possible.
No matter which product you choose, use water that is as hot
as your hands can bear. Rubber gloves will permit use of the
hottest possible water; they'll also protect sensitive hands from irritation. The hot water will help to soften the greasy soil, making
it easier for the hand dishwashing liquid's surfactants to loosen
and emulsify it. When washing in a ·dishpan or sink, wash dishes
and utensils by groups. Start with the least soiled group and end
with those having the heaviest soil build-up. A good sequence is
glasses, flatware, plates, serving dishes, and pots/ pans last.
OTHER USES

Hand dishwashing liquids are very versatile. They can be used to
clean dirty hands, they can be used to hand launder delicate washable clothing, and, as mentioned throughout this book, they can
be used for many other stain removal and cleaning purposes.
Caution: Do not use a hand dishwashing liquid

in an automatic dishwasher-it will oversuds.

Floors
CARPET AND RUG CLEANING
Typical supermarket carpet-cleaning products include powders,
foam shampoos that come in a pressurized can, and liquids
sprayed straight from the container. A few concentrated products-powder or liquid-must be mixed with water.
Most manufacturers recommend that you gently work the
cleaner into the carpet with a brush and remove the residue
with a regular vacuum cleaner (liquids, of course, need time to
dry first).
Manual carpet cleaning isn't as unpleasant as it might sound.
The powders minimize the mess, and the job goes quickly. The
powders are almost dry, so the room can be used immediately
afterward. (Actually, "dry" powders are slightly moist.)
Stains are likely to be a problem for supermarket carpetcleaning products. None of the ones tested in the past were better
than fair in treating any of Consumers Union's test stains.
CIEANING Willi A MACHINE

Wet-cleaning machines (also known as "steamers" or hot-water extraction equipment) are usually sold or rented. with a recommended cleaning product. The majority of machines use a hot
detergent solution, which the machine sprays on the rug. They not

17

18

FLOORS

only apply the solution but also use suction to remove it. The
need for water complicates matters. Some machines .get their
water supply via a long hose that you attach to a hot-water faucet.
As you dean, the hose is dragged along. In other models, you fill
a reservoir with hot water. With both kinds, you will eventually
need to pour out the dirty water, which is collected either in the
base of the machine or in a removable container. When full, the
part you empty ca,n weigh almost 50 pounds.
With any machine that uses water, or with any wet cleaner you
scrub yourself, you must wait for the carpet to dry before walking

CARPET AND RUG CLEANING

19

on it, which can take at least overnight. There's also a risk of wetting the carpet too much. Water can seep through and damage a
hardwood floor or the latex backing of an old carpet (it shouldn't
hurt the polyolefin backing of most new carpets but can delaminate adhesives).
Rented wet-cleaning machines are likely to be larger than those
sold to homeowners. This can pose transportation problems if you
don't have access to a vehicle with adequate cargo space.
Instead of water and detergent, some machines use powder.
They may apply the powder, work it in, and use suction to remove

GUIDEUNES FOR Do-IT-YOURSELF CARPET CLEANING
Be sure to give your carpet a thorough vacuuming before you start
the wet cleaning process. Whether you use a rented "steamer" or
one purchased for regular use, read the. manufacturer's instruc~
tions carefully before attempting to shampoo your carpet.
Use an extra "dry stroke." A carpet's cleanliness can be optimized by ensuring that your machine provides good extraction.
Make an extraction pass with the water spray on, then make a second pass with the water spray off. This increases the amount of
water removed from the carpeting. Check your work by wiping
your hand across the top of the carpeting. If you get drops of
water, extract the carpeting again with the spray off. If your hand
is damp and the carpet feels like a wrung-out sponge, you are extracting correctly.
Use thecorTect chemicals. Use only chemicals designed to clean
carpeting, and use them according to the manufacturer's recommended concentrations. If the package says to use one ounce,
measure it out. Be sure you do not use too much. Do not use laun-

dry soap, shampoo, dish soap, etc., to dean your carpet. Never
put any kind of bleach through the extraction equipment. Bleach
can ruin your carpet and void a manufacturer's warranty. You can
usually find carpet-cleaning chemicals close to carpet-cleaning
rental equipment or in the cleaning section of a grocery store.
Some of the major brands' of carpet-cleaning chemicals have been
tested by major fiber producers and approved for use on stainresistant carpeting.
Pre-spray where necessary. If your carpeting is "really dirty," increase the amount of pre-spray Coften called traffic lane cleaner)
that you use. Do not increase the amount of carpet detergent.
Neutralize. A final vinegar-water rinse (1 cup of white vinegar
in 1 gallon of plain water) and a thorough extraction are helpful
to remove and neutralize any detergent residue in the carpet.
Dry properly. Allow the· carpet to dry completely. Open windows and move air through the house with fans. Keep family
members and pets off the carpet until it is dry.

20

FLOORS

it, or they may merely apply the powder and provide agitation.
You then use your own vacuum cleaner to clean it up. It is important to vacuum thoroughly to prevent powder buildup.
Residual powder may cause problems if you wet-clean your carpet at a later date. If your household vacuum will not do an adequate job, consider renting a commercial vacuum. (Before using a
powder rug cleaner, be sure to read your vacuum cleaner owner's
manual for possible precautions regarding these materials.) Follow
the manufacturer's recommendations regarding the length of time
to leave the powder on the carpet.
PROFESSIONAL CLEANING

Carpets. Ideally, a professional cleaning service should visit your
home to carefully evaluate the carpet's condition before rendering
an estimate, but often this does not happen. Some cleaning services will provide a preliminary price pending closer inspection in
the home. This is perfectly acceptable if the cleaners do a careful
inspection and requote (if necessary) before cleaning begins.
The cleaning service should discuss 'its procedures in detail.
Depending on the carpet's condition, it may not be possible to
clean the carpet completely. The company should inform the customer if its cleaners will not be able to remove a stain without
damage. There shouldn't be any surprises.
Ask the company what it will do if its cleaners damage the carpet, and ascertain how they will protect adjacent furniture . Be sure
to check references to determine if the cleaning service adheres to
these precautions during the job.
Rugs. Loose rugs, especially handmade ones, should be removed
and cleaned professionally "in-plant" rather than in your home.
Rug cleaners offer extra services such as repairing the fringe,
reweaving, and moth-resistant treatment.
You can take any size rug to a professional cleaner or, for an

FIRST AID FOR CARPET STAINS

21

extra fee, some cleaning companies will pick up and drop off a
rug. If you call a service that comes to your home, try to arrange
a definite appointment, or you might have to wait at home all day.
RECOMMENDATIONS

Carpet manufacturers recommend cleaning household carpet
every 6 to 18 months, depending on the level of traffic. To maximize the time between cleanings, keep dirt outside with mats at
each entry.
Whether you do the work yourself or hire professionals, be sure
to clean your carpet regularly to prevent buildup of soil. Many doit-yourself products should be able to handle a lightly soiled carpet. Ground-in dirt and stains from spills are much more difficult
to remove. In general, when a rug has been soiled by gardenvariety dirt, it's better to send it out to professionals or to call in a
profeSSional cleaning service.

FmST AID FOR CARPET STAINS
Although no carpet is completely stain proof, most modern carpets
have been treated to render them stain resistant. If you act quickly,
most spills can be removed easily. A delay in taking action will increase the probability of the stain's becoming permanent. With
some spilled substances--children's fruit drinks, for instance-you
have only minutes before the stain sets permanently.
Do not scrub the stained area. Doing so can cause pile distortion. Wherever possible, immediately blot up spills using a clean
white absorbent material to avoid the possibility of dye transfer
and to facilitate inspection of the stain removal process while
stains transfer to the towel. When the stain has been removed,
continue to blot with dry cloths or paper towels until the area is
completely dry.

22

FLOORS

If the spill remains on the carpet for a long time and becomes
a dry mass, scrape off as much as possible using the side of a
spoon or a blunt spatula before attempting to remove the remainder. For chewing gum or wax, freeze with an ice cube before
scraping. Be sure to vacuum up all remaining solid residue.
If the cause of a spot can be identified, it may be possible to
remove it yourself. Refer to Appendix B: Stain Removal, and carefully adhere to the recommended directions.
Copious spills that penetrate through the carpet to the backing and even to the floor are a special problem. If the substance
smells, the carpet may have to be lifted and cleaned. Consider
hiring professional carpet cleaners rather than attempting to do
the job yourself. Just blot it up and get help. (Do-it~yourself
cleaning efforts might render the stain difficult for even an expert to remove.)
Household products that contain bleach, hydrogen peroxide, or
some other oxidizing agent can cause irreversible damage. A leaking container of laundry bleach is an obvious villain. Other products are more insidious. The damage caused by acne, foot, or dog
mange medications containing benzoyl peroxide, for instance,
often doesn't show up right away. Those medications, typically
hard to wash off, have ruined many a carpet. Benzoyl peroxide is
activated by moisture from humidity, a spilled drink, or wet cleaning of carpets. Impossible-to-remove discolorations may show up
after contact with moisture. Other products to watch out for include swimming pool chemicals, drain cleaners, toilet bowl cleaners, mildew removers, liquid plant foods, and pesticides.

FLOOR CARE
Vinyl is one of the most widely used man-made flooring materials. It is available in conventional and no-wax styles. For durabil-

FLOOR CARE

23

ity, choose a thick vinyl with homogeneous color that extends
through the entire thickness. The no-wax versions have a clear
wear-layer on the surface. Other man-made flooring materials include linoleum (which is highly susceptible to damage from strong
cleaners), asphalt tile (which is hard but brittle), and rubber tile (a
very quiet flooring material). Natural flooring materials include
wood, cork, masonry, stone, marble, terrazzo, ceramic tile, quarry
tile, terra cotta, slate, and concrete.
The basic rule for proper floor care is to pick the right product
for the job. There are three basic categories of floor care products:
products that clean, combination products that both clean and
shine, and products that add a protective shine to the floor.
FLOOR CLEANERS

Floor cleaners remove dirt and soil from resilient floors or wellsealed wood floors. Some can leave a dulling residue that must be
washed away. For no-wax flooring, be sure to use a product that
is formulated for that purpose.
COMBINATION PRODUCTS

These products combine cleaning agents for dirt removal and polishing agents that add protection and shine. Since there are many
types of combination floor care products, be sure to read the label
recommendations pertaining to the types of flooring they claim to
be good for. Some combination products are self-removing,
whereas others should be removed periodically. If you have nowax flooring, you may not need to use a combination product,
even for cleaning. If you have very shiny, polyurethane-finished
wood floors, polish won't make any real difference in appearance.
But on no-wax vinyl-surfaced floors, whose shine is a bit less glaring, polish can add a touch of gloss.
If you have a vinyl no-wax floor and feel compelled to use pol-

24

FLOORS

ish, you won't be doing anything but boosting the shine. The
amount of protection offered by a thin film of polish is insignificant compared with the protection offered by the vinyl flooring itself.
Even rugged plastics such as polyurethane and vinyl can get
scratched and worn over time. It is also reasonable to assume that
an accumulation of tiny scratches will eventually dull no-wax
flooring a little. The polishes in combination floor cleaners may
have some ability to fill in tiny scratches, which might improve the
shine of worn areas. Until a no-wax floor is worn, however, floor
polish is a waste of money. You'd be better off saving that money
to make up for the extra cost of the no-wax flOOring.
WAXING FLOORS THAT NEED IT

Before deciding to wax a no-wax floor that looks dull, attempt to
remove any residue buildup that might be causing the dull look.
Use a no-rinse floor cleaner and scrub the floor with a mop or stiff
bristle brush, wiping up the loosened soil as you clean. You may
need to clean the floor three or four times to completely remove
the residue. Once the floor is free of reSidue, use a floor polish
that is formulated for no-wax floors to renew the shine.
Conventional floor polishes are used to protect and add or restore shine to resilient floors, as well as stone or masonry floors.
They are applied after the floor has been cleaned, rinsed, and
dried. They dry shiny and require periodic removal.
REMOVING

OLD WAX

Technology has produced polishes that don't need buffing, but
it has been less successful in eliminating the chore of stripping
off old polish as the layers build up. Even polishes labeled as
self-cleaning leave a small amount of old polish behind. The problem is usually most noticeable in corners, where the polish isn't

FLOOR CARE

25

worn away by traffic. While you maybe content to let the layers
of wax accumulate for a long time before trying to remove them,
it is best to remove old polish after six or eight coats, or at least
once a year.
The typical recipe for removing old floor wax is ljz cup of powdered floor cleaner and 2 cups of ammonia in 1 gallon of cool
water, some fine steel wool, and a lot of elbow grease. There are
also wax removers on the market. Some are recommended on the
labels of their brand-mate floor polishes.
RECOMMhNDA110NS

It is important to have a regular floor-care schedule. Floors that are

heavily trafficked will require more frequent maintenance than
floors that get less use. Spills are more noticeable on very light and
very dark floors . Solid-colored floors show soil more quickly than
patterned floors.
Blot spills up as soon as they occur. Do not rub--it could cause
a dull spot. This is especially true for .polished floors .
Remove dirt regularly from wood and cork floors using a
broom, lightweight. vacuum cleaner, or dust mop. Small particles
can scratch the flooring. Periodically restore the shine by rebuffing or using a wax that removes the previous layer as the new
layer'is applied. Stubborn spots can be removed by rubbing with
fine steel wool or, preferably, a plastic mesh sponge dipped in a
solvent-based wax.
Washable floors should first be cleaned with a broom, dust
mop, or vacuum cleaner. They should then be damp mopped
using water and an all-purpose cleaner recommended for washing
floors. Wring out the mop before using it, and change the cleaning solution as often as possible.
For taking care of new or fairly new no-wax floors, use a plain
damp mop or a little detergent followed by a rinse. When the floor

26

FLOORS

is so worn that it looks as if it really needs a polish,choose among
the no-wax floor cleaning products or use a combination product
that is recommended for use on no-wax floors. Take particular
care to rinse off combination cleaners after each use.
IIARD-SURFACE-FLOOR FmST

AID

FOR STAINS

When using any household chemicals, handle them with care and
store them out of the reach of children. Never mix chemicals with
each other or with household cleaning products unless there are
specific directions to do so. Wear rubber gloves when working
with alcohol, hydrogen peroxide solution, household ammonia,
acids, or chlorine bleach. To be on the safe side, it's a good idea
to work in a well-ventilated room: Establish cross ventilation with
open windows and doors and a window fan to exhaust air.
Caution: Never mix ammonia and chlorine
bleach.
Before using any chemical, test it on a small corner of the stain.
If your procedure is wrong, the chemical damage will be limited
to that one area. If you use steel wool on a stain, use grade 00 and
rub gently. On wood, rub with the grain.
After you have tried ordinary hand dishwashing liquid and
water applied with a rag or sponge--or a nonbleaching allpurpose liquid cleaner sprayed from its container-try these suggestions to remove a variety of potentially stubborn stains.
Whenever possible, work on a wet stain before it has had a
chance to soak in andlor dry.
Alcoholic beverages. Try rubbing with a clean cloth dampened
with rubbing alcohol.
Blood. Try clear, cold water first (before any detergent). If the

HARD-SURFACE-FLOOR FIRST AID FOR STAINS

27

stain remains, cautiously apply a solution of ammonia and cold
water, and quickly rinse to avoid discoloration.
Candle wax or chewing gum. Use ice cubes to chill the material to brittleness. Then, using a plastic spatula, carefully scrape the
wax or gum from the floor.
Cigarette burn. For heavy stains, try scouring powder and a
piece of fine steel wool or a plastic scouring pad dipped in water.
For hard-surface floors, rub with a cloth dampened with a solution
of lemon juice and water.
Coffee or fruit juice. Saturate a cloth with a solution of one part
glycerine to three parts water and place it over the stain for several hours. (Glycerine is available in drugstores.) If the spot remains, rub it gently with scouring powder and a cloth dampened
in hot water.
Dyes. After applying on an inconspicuous spot to be sure the floor
will not be damaged, rub with a cloth dampened in a solution of
one part chlorine bleach and two parts water. If this doesn't work,
try scouring powder and a cloth dampened with hot water.
Grease and oil. Remove as much as· possible with newspaper,
paper towels, or a plastic spatula. On resilient tile, rub with a cloth
dampened in hand dishwashing liquid and warm water (or an allpurpose cleaner). On wood and cork, place a cloth saturated with
dry cleaning fluid on the stain for no more than 5 minutes. Then
wipe the area dry and wash with detergent and water.
Ink. Try a commercial ink remover, carefully following instructions, or use rubbing alcohol. It might be helpful to cover the stain
with a poultice of diatomaceous earth and alcohol, cover with
plastic wrap, and let stand overnight.
Lipstick. Try fine steel wool wet with detergent and water. If the
floor is hard surfaced or has a no-wax finish, or is embossed vinyl
composition, use a plastic scouring pad instead of steel wool.
Mustard. Place a cloth soaked in hydrogen peroxide solution

28

FLOORS

over the stain. Over that, place an ammonia-soaked cloth. Leave
in place until the stain has faded, sponge with water, and wipe
dry. Open your blinds or curtains for one to two days. The sunlight may fade residual mustard stains.
Paint or varnish. On resilient tile, use liquid or all-purpose detergent with either a cloth, a sponge, or fine steel wool very carefully applied. On a hard-surface floor, scrub with a concentrated
solution of powdered detergent and water, or apply undiluted liquid laundry detergent.
Rust. Use a commercial rust remover intended for your particular
type of floor.
Shoe polish or nail polish. If concentrated detergent solution
doesn't work on resilient flooring, try scouring powder or steel
wool. On wood and cork, fine steel wool should do the trick.
Don't use nail polish remover; it may soften resilient flooring.
Tar. Use ice cubes to chill the tar to brittleness. Then scrape the
tar carefully with a plastic spatula. To remove the tar stain, apply
a damp cloth wrapped around a paste made . of powdered detergent, chalk, or diatomaceous earth, and ·w ater. Leave the paste on
the stain for several hours.
Urine. After applying on an inconspicuous spot to be sure the
floor will not be damaged, rub with a hot, damp cloth and scouring powder. For increased effectiveness, place a cloth soaked in
hydrogen peroxide over the stain and cover that with a cloth
soaked in ammonia. Leave in place until the stain has faded,
sponge with water, and wipe dry.
FINISHING TOUCHE'S

After you have successfully removed a stain, refinishing may be
necessary. Rinse the area well and allow it to dry before you apply
any new finish (polish, for example). The newly finished area
should blend in with the rest of the floor within a day or two.

Furniture
WOOD FURNITURE
Some say keeping wood furniture clean should require a mlnImum amount of care, asserting that the oil or lacquer finish normally used on furniture protects the wood (by sealing). Others
believe that the original finish itself needs a protective layer-usually a wax-that should be renewed periodically. Between those
who opt for no wax and those who recommend lots of wax are
those who say you should use a little wax sometimes.
At one time, a key part of spring cleaning involved giving
the furniture a fresh coat of wax-paste wax, no less, applied
with plenty of muscle. The wax was supposed to "feed" the
wood and help protect it. No doubt, some people still hew to
that ritual.
Consumers Union's testers have found that, in general, the need
for waxing and cleaning furniture with a brand-name product is
often quite unnecessary. Most furniture won't benefit from waxing
because its surface has been sealed at the factory with a durable
finish that keeps the wood from drying out and, to some degree,
protects against spills and minor scratches. Oils and waxes don't
penetrate the finish. The minuscule residue that remains from

29

30

FURNITURE

most polishes after application and buffing contributes nothing to
damage control.
Modern furniture does need cleaning, however. Dust, smoke,
and greasy cooking fumes combine to create a dulling film.
Fingerprints begin as small smudges and grow to a grimy coating.
You can choose among dozens of furniture cleaners at the supermarket. Many, like the familiar Pledge, Behold, and Endust, are
intended primarily to help remove dust. Others, such as Kleen 'n
Shine and Murphy's Oil Soap, are intended for cleaning wood and
other surfaces. Hardware stores carry still other furniture cleaners
and polishes, generally oil-based products such as Old English Red
Oil and Scott's Liquid Gold. Only a few actually contain wax.
Except for old furniture whose original finish may not have
sealed the wood very well-or newer furniture that has been
used a lot and whose finish may be worn thin-regular dusting
with a soft rag slightly dampened with water may be all you need
to keep furniture looking new and clean. It's still true, however,
that finely finished wood and wood with a modern, well-sealed
finish should be treated with respect when it comes to water. A
wood furniture cleaner should first be tested on an inconspicuous
area before attempting any cleaning or treatment method. Be sure
HOME BREWS

In addition to plain water and dishwashing liquid, Consumers
Union found the following home brews did a creditable cleaning
job on wood furniture:
• Yz teaspoon light olive oil added to y. cup white vinegar. This proved
to be as effective as any store product.
• '/ 4 cup walnut oil plus 4 drops of lemon extract. This was only as
effective as the better oil-based products.

WOOD FURNITURE

31

to read product labels carefully, paying particular attention to
prohibited actions.
The mirror finish on a piece of wood furniture is there courtesy
of the furniture maker. The shine you get from a product depends '
almost entirely on the nature of the furniture's original finish. For
instance, no polish is likely to increase the luster of a piano top
made from high-gloss mahogany. It is already mirrorlike.
Furthermore, the finish isn't likely to be protected to any degree
by using furniture polish.
Waxing won't improve the shine of furniture whose original finish is still intact. In fact, a furniture polish may muddy the finish.
A buildup of wax can darken the wood and mask its grain. Some
oils (such as lemon oil) applied to a previously waxed surface can
make the surface sticky, vulnerable to fingerprints, and a magnet
for dust. Wax-containing products applied over some oils won't
adhere properly. Cleaning up the mess may require a lot of elbow
grease.
Stains. Consumers Union's tests showed that a supermarket furniture cleaner isn't likely to protect a wood finish against common
stains. Moreover, a fresh application of the product is by no means
guaranteed to remove any new stains. A bit of ordinary dishwashing liquid and water should do the job just as well. Be sure
to pretest to ensure that it does not leave a film behind, which
could interfere with bonding of wax and varnish.
Water. Any furniture cleaner should be able to wipe away water
spots. But water that's allowed to stand on wood furniture is likely
to penetrate most finishes. When you wipe away the water, a
cloudy white mark often remains (except solvent-borne urethane
cleaners). You may be able to buff out a light mark with a product that has a high oil content. But some rings on certain kinds
of furniture finish won't yield-meaning it's time to call in the
refinisher.

32

FURNITURE

Scratches. Most furniture-care products don't contain dye, so
they aren't meant to cover up deep scratches. Products that claim
to hide surface scratches are worth a try. Tests showed that one
product, Oz Cream Polish, managed to fill in scratches and make
them less visible. Sometimes a little acetone can be used to dissolve the lacquer, allowing it to refill the scratches. Here again,
pretesting is essential.
RECOMMENDATIONS

For relatively new furniture that's been maintained in good condition, there's no practical reason to add another cleaning product
to the clutter under the kitchen sink. It's easy enough to use a little
plain water and hand dishwashing liqUid to take care of dirtier surfaces. Again, it's a good idea to try any furniture-treatment product on an inconspicuous area before plunging into the job full tilt.
If you want to protect furniture finishes against heat and solvents-such as alcoholic beverages, aftershave lotion, perfume,
cough syrup, and the like-the best protection is a nonabsorbent
barrier, such as a dish or a coaster.
CARING FOR VALUED FURNITURE OR TEAK FURNITURE

Older furniture that still bears its original finish and teak furniture
both require special care. Regular dusting is important for antiques, say the experts. Tools of the trade include feather dusters,
soft cotton cloths laundered without harsh detergents, and small
vacuum cleaners.
The experts also recommend waxing, but generally only once
or twice a year. Some antique dealers recommend waxing at the
beginning and end of the heating season. Changes in temperature
and humidity can be very damaging to wood furniture because
wood shrinks and expands in response to those changes. Waxing

WOOD FURNITURE

33

unfinished surfaces allows the raw wood to absorb the wax,
thereby minimizing the chance that the wood will crack or the veneer will lift or separate. You should wax the underside of a table,
for example, as well as the unfinished interior of highboys, breakfronts, and other so-called case pieces.
Some experts recommend against waxes that contain silicone.
They say such products compromise the wood's ability to respond
to changes in temperature and humidity, and increase the risk of
cracking.
Teak, which is an oil-finished product, also has special needs.
Some industry experts say frequent dusting is important. Furniture
that's used fairly often may need oiling every month or two. The
experts recommend a solution of mild detergent for cleaning and
tung oil (or equivalent) for restoring the sheen in dry areas .
Teak furniture not subject to much wear may need oiling only
a few times a year. If the wood looks pale and the surface feels
dry, the furniture probably needs oiling. One teak furniture retailer
suggests using a clean, soft cloth to oil the entire piece, then letting the oil sit for three to four hours or, better, overnight.
Afterward, buff with another clean, soft cloth to remove excess oil.

UPHOLSTERED

FURNITIJRE

Regular vacuuming is about the best way to keep upholstery looking fresh. But you may not be motivated to vacuum upholstered
furniture often enough; dust isn't as obvious on an armchair as it
is on a tabletop. Unless upholstered furniture is vacuumed regularly, the material can become so dirty that drastic measures may
become necessary.
A surprisingly large number of people take the most drastic
measure of all-they just throw out the soiled furniture and re-

34

FURNITURE

place it with new furniture. According to a survey, that's how a
significant number of Consumer Reports subscribers dealt with the
problem of soil buildup. Some took a less-drastic approach, opting for reupholstering or slipcovers. Still others chose heavy-duty,
overall cleaning-a far more economical solution, if it works.
There are three ways to clean upholstered furniture: You

UPHOLSTERED FURNI11JRE

35

can buy a cleaning product and apply it to the fabric by hand.
You can buy or rent a machine that cleans carpets and upholstery.
You can call in a professional deaningservice, usually listed under
"Carpet Cleaners" or "Upholstery Cleaners" in the Yellow Pages.
Generally, cleaning by hand means spraying upholstery cleaner
on the fabric; gently' rubbing the resulting foam with a damp

DEALING WITH SPILlS AND STAINS ON LEArnER

Leather dyers either apply a pigmented coating to the leather's surface or treat the hide with aniline dye. Pigmented leather is more
resistant to water-soluble spills and stains. Aniline-dyed leather is
exceptionally soft and exceptionally porous. Spills soak up
quickly,becoming stains that can be almost impossible to remove.
You can test your leather furniture to find out which type of dye
was used. Place a drop of water on a location that's not often seen
(under the cushion, for example). If the water doesn't soak in, the
leather is pigmented. If it does soak in, the leather is aniline
dyed-and vulnerable.
Suede is another vulnerable leather-not just because of the
dyeing process, but because it's porous and quick to sop up stains.
In addition, suede has a nap that's flattened by liquid spills and
by use. Only a professional leather refinisher can restore the nap
to suede.
Vacuuming is an important part of routine maintenance of leather
furniture, whether it's pigmented, aniline dyed, or suede. You can
also wipe pigmented leather periodically with a soft white cloth
dampened with water. And you can brush suede with a terry-cloth
tow~l to spiff up its nap. Beyond vacuuming, there isn't much you
can do for aniline-dyed leather. When it becomes stained or soiled,
your only recourse is professional cleaning.

If you spill something on pigmented leather, the faster you
clean it up, the better. Consumers Union ' applied test stains to
swatches of pigmented leather and blotted them up a minute later
with a damp washcloth. The water-based stains (ketchup, cola,
coffee, grape juice, milk, mustard, arid red wine) disappeared, but
oil-based stains like crayon, ballpoint-pen ink, lipstick, Italian
salad dressing, and cream shoe ,polish did not come off.
The~ some commercial leather cleaners were tried to see how
theymighthandle these stubborn stains on pigmeljlted leather. All
of the cleaners removed some color.
Don't ·consider using cleaning solvents, ink removers, or paint
removers on pigmented leather. Since the color is essentially
painted on the leather, those products can remove color.
When you are faced with stains that won't come out, find a professional. Call the store where you purchased the furniture. If you
don't get results, check the Yellow Pages or ask a local dry cleaner
for advice. Cleaners who handle leather clothing don't always
work on leather furniture, so it may take a few calls to find a
leather-furniture cleaner. Expect the cleaning to be costly, and expect to be without your furniture for a while: often, professionals
prefer to clean leather in the shop. Removing dirt and stains can
also ' remove dyes, so the furniture may need to be recolored.

36

FURNITURE

sponge, cloth, or brush; and vacuuming the residue. The job can
be time-consuming, and the furniture may not turn out clean
enough. Any hand cleaning product is likely to y,rork better if the
job is done before the upholstery is truly filthy.
Even subscribers who cleaned with a machine weren't always
happy with the result, and some found a machine difficult to use.
Setting up the machine, cleaning the piece of furniture, and
then disassembling and cleaning the machine can be quite a lot
of work.
Many subscribers left the cleaning to a professional, but a
substantial number indicated that even the pros couldn't get their
furniture clean.
PROFESSIONAL CLEANING

Cleaning a six-foot sofa can cost anywhere from $40 to $100, depending on where you live and whom you hire. Replacing a damaged sofa with a new one can cost a lot more, so price shouldn't
be the most important criterion when you're hiring a professional;
competence should be.
One way to find an upholstery cleaning service, of course, is to
look in the phone book, where you'll find listings for big national
companies, large regional companies, and local companies. If you
come up empty, the International Institute of Carpet and
Upholstery Certification can recommend firms that have passed a
test on cleaning upholstery. When you call the institute's number
(206-693-5675), a represent3tive will use your zip code to locate
two or three cleaning firms in your area. Another phone number
to remember is the Association of Specialists in Cleaning and
Restoration (1-800-272-7012). Both organizations may be able to
help with questions regarding stain removal.
Expect any upholstery cleaning firm to give you a preliminary

UPHOLSTERED FURNITURE

37

estimate over the phone, then come to the house to evaluate the
furniture and spot-test it-by applying a bit of cleaner to an inconspicuous piece of the fabric-before giving a firm price quote.
A reputable company should explain the procedure and tell you
what the furniture will look like after cleaning. They should outline their guarantee and voluntarily offer references.
Some professionals may prefer to "steam" clean upholstery with
hot water and detergent because the results are generally better
than dry cleaning with a solvent. But cleaning with water, even
when it's done by a pro, can be a risky business. Therefore, a careful cleaner will spot-test when they come to your home to determine the potential for damage before quoting a firm price. If
problems appear as a result of a spot test, a professional cleaner
may switch from steam cleaning to dry cleaning.
Some professional cleaners spot-test on the scheduled cleaning
day. That's also an acceptable approach, as long as the tested material has time to dry thoroughly-so any defects are visible-before work begins.
Professional carpet and upholstery cleaners may raise the subject of chemical fabric protectors. There is, of course, an extra
charge for such treatment, and therefore there are extra profits for
the seller. If a protector was applied at the mill where the fabric is
made, the fabric shouldn't need to be retreated until it has been
cleaned two or three times.
Although there are many brands of stain repellent, there are baSically two types: fluorocarbons and silicones. Fluorocarbons (e.g.,
Scotchgard or Teflon) protect against both oil- and water-based
stains; silicones protect only against water-based stains. Some silicone products may yellow with exposure to ultraviolet light.
If you don't know whether your upholstery has been treated
with a stain protector, you might consider having one applied after

38

FURNITURE

cleaning. Two caveats: It's important that the protector be applied
evenly. (Electric sprayers and aerosol cans are likely to create a
more even coat than is possible with a pump sprayer.) And it's important to check the l~bel for precautions. Some protectors are
recommended for use only on certain types of fabrics. As with any
treatment, it is advisable to apply a bit of protector on a hidden
area of the upholstery to make sure the dye doesn't bleed.
RECOMMENDATIONS

Preventive maintenance-vacuuming regularly and catching spills
before they become stains-can go a long way toward postponing
the need for an overall cleaning. Vacuum all surfaces of the furniture, including the back and sides, the skirt, the arms, the platform
underneath the cushions, and both sides of loose cushions.
If you're working on arms that are narrower than the vacuum
cleaner's nozzle, cover the exposed section of the nozzle with
your hand or a piece of cardboard to improve suction. When vacuuming a delicate fabric-velvet, nubby silk, or crewel embroi. dery, for instance-you can avoid snagging the fabric by placing
a piece of nonmetallic window screen or nylon mesh between the
nozzle and the fabric.
Once furniture is too soiled for vacuuming, your best bet is to
hire a profeSSional. Choose one who will evaluate the furniture
and spot-test the fabric before cleaning. Make sure the company
indicates, in writing, any problems anticipated during the cleaning.
You'll save money by doing the job yourself, but your success
will depend on your own cleaning skills, and the work takes a lot
of time. Spot-test any cleaning product you plan to use before you
submit your furniture to a cleaning, and apply the cleaning product in a well-lighted area so you can see how the job is going.
A steamer can be used only on fabrics that can tolerate a waterbased cleaner. Additionally, the machine isn't easy to set up, use,

A GUIDE

TO UPHOLSTERY FABRICS

39

and clean. Be careful not to overwet the upholstery, and be very
careful with piping. Moisture can cause many types of stuffing to
bleed. After using a steamer, open windows and doors and use
fans to speed drying. Upholstery should dry in less than 24 hours.

A

GUIDE TO UPHOLSTERY FABRICS

Wool, cotton, linen, silk, rayon, nylon, and polyester are among the
fibers that are turned into coverings for sofas and chairs. The fabric
may be made of a Single fiber or a blend, and it may have a special
finish, such as the starchy glaze that gives linen its soft glow.
Steam cleaning with detergent and water is an effective way to
clean many fabrics. But not all fabrics relate well to water. Some
shrink; some become mottled by water spots; some turn brown.
To clean fabric successfully, you must first find out just what
kind of fabric you're dealing with. If the furniture was purchased
within the last few years, it probably has a cleaning code on its
label. (Look under the cushions for a tag affixed to the platform.)
A "w" means that the fabric can be cleaned with a water-based
product. An "S" indicates that a solvent-based cleaner (dry cleaning) is required. If the code reads "W-S," the choice is yours. An
"X" is bad news: Only cleaning by vacuuming is recommended.
The guide to upholstery fabrics on page 40 provides information about the cleaning of materials commonly used in upholstery
textiles and can help you decide whether to dry-clean with solvents or "wet clean" with a water-based solution. If your fabric is
a blend of different fibers, base your decision on the most sensitive one in the blend.
UPHOLSTERY STAINS

For some furniture, the problem isn't widespread soil but a sudden spill. If you're quick enough, blotting the spill with a clean

40

A GUIDE TO UPHOLSTERY FABRICS

FURNITIJRE

41

A GUIDE TO UPHOLSTERY FABRICS
This guide was published in a February ·1992 report.

Fiber. Cotton refers to all cotton except Haitian, which may · release a brown dye and stretch when wet. All the fibers are likely
to be stained by oil-based spills. Cotton, linen, rayon, silk, wool,
and nylon are also'likely to be stained by water-based spills. Dry
cleaning is acceptable for all the fibers. Wet cleaning, which often
works better, is generally OKfor all, but check under "wet-cleaning

Cotton

flaws" to see what problems can arise, and be sure to spot-test.
Tendency to bleed. On a .scale from 1 to 5, with 1 most likely to
bleed; 5 least likely. Bleeding can occur with either wet or dry
cleaning,
Wet-cleaning flaws. The tendency .for fibers to wateNpot,
brown, or shrink during cleaning with a water-based solution.
These columns can help you determine whether dry or wet clean. ing is more appropriate for your upholstery.

Low
be removed
of cleaning.

Linen

2

Low

High

High

Rayon

2

High

High

Very high

Silk,

1-3

High

High

Low

Water marks may be difficult to remove without damaging fabric.
stretch with excessive agitation.

Wool

2-3

Low

Moderate

Moderate

Turns dark when wet; hard to assess quality of cleaning.

Acetate

4-5

Low

Low

Low

Tends to shrink even when preshrunk. Dissolves in acetone. Avoid nailpolish remover and commercial ink removers.

Acrylic

5

Low

Moderate

Low

Spots may reappear after cleaning.

Nylon

4-5

Low

Moderate

Low

Dissolves in strong acids.

Olefin

5

Low

Low

Low

Spots may reappear after cleaning. Latex backing may be weakened by
age, sunlight, and chlorinated solvents. Resists bleach.

Polyester

5

Low

Low

Low

Spots may reappear after cleaning.

sizing, or other fin
to shrink even

42

FURNITURE

white towel or white (no pattern) paper towels may do the trick.
(A white towel lets you see what you're removing and eliminates
the chance of introducing another stain in the form of a dye.)
Once a spill becomes a stain, cleanup can still be successful, if you
use the right approach. Certain basics apply to all stain-removal efforts. For recommended cleaning agents and techniques for removing a variety of stains from both washable and unwashable
fabrics, refer to Appendix B: Stain Removal.

House Cleaning
ALL-PURPOSE CLEANERS
A good all-purpose liquid cleaner should be able to handle a variety of chores but may not be really useful for all purpo~e~ . Most,
for example, lack the special qualities required to clean windows
and ovens or remove mildew. But all-purpose cleaners are versatile enough for mopping, washing, and spot-cleaning hard surfaces such as walls, floors, appliances, kitchen cabinets, and
countertops. All-purpose cleaners are often the type of product
needed when water won't do.
SPOT CLEANING

Of the two types of all-purpose cleaners available, the "pourables"
(liquids applied on grime) generally have stronger formulations
and do better overall spot cleaning than spray cleaners-which at
best turn in just an adequate job. Top-performing pourables often
contain pine oil, an effective cleaning ingredient with a distinctive
scent of pine associated with the impression of cleanliness.
FLOOR MOPPING

Pourable products when diluted in a bucket of water can also
be ' effective for mopping floors. Few spray products suggest that
their liquid contents can be used in a similar manner. For floor

43

44

HOUSE CLEANING

mopping, effective pourables often claim to contain pine oil, citrus
oil, or oil soap.
DAMAGE TO SURFACES

When used at full strength, an all-purpose cleaner should be used
gently, then promptly and carefully rinsed off. Otherwise, you may
risk marring the surface being cleaned. Check the label for precautions; if in doubt, first test the cleaner on an inconspicuous
place for marring.
SAFETY TO USERS

Some products are caustic enough to warrant your using rubber
gloves when cleaning, or at least avoiding prolonged contact with
the skin. Since the solvents and other ingredients that dissolve,
emulSify, suspend, or otherwise loosen grime are powerful chemicals, any cleaner should be used carefully hi accordance with its
labeled precautions and kept out of the reach of children. To
avoid potentially hazardous chemical .reactions, never mix any
cleaner with anything other than water.
RECOMMENDATIONS

It's handy to have both types of all-purpose cleaners: a spray for
quick point-and-shoot cleaning and a pourable for mopping and
heavy-duty spot cleaning. Spot cleaning can always be improved,
within limits, with the application of elbow grease, prompt rinsing, and plenty of clean wipes.
Most pourable cleaners may be diluted for cleaning walls and
floors with a sponge or a mop and bucket, and many should
do a respectable job. Some pourables and sprays are labeled
as disinfectants. At best, however, such cleaners can only temporarily reduce populations of some germs in a limited area for
a limited time.

BATHROOM

CLEANERS

45

BATHROOM CLEANERS
Some of the products promoted as bathroom cleaners derive most
of their strength from old-fashioned pine oil; others rely on a mix
of other powerful chemicals. Because damp bathrooms are fertile
ground for fungi, bathroom cleaners often claim to contain an antimildew agent, an ingredient some all-purpose cleaners lack.
Per use, some bathroom cleaners cost up to twice as much as
some all-purpose cleaners. Manufacturers try to justify the higher
cost with fancy packaging. Trigger spray pumps, aerosol cans, and
flip-top containers are more convenient than the screw-top containers that hold some all-purpose cleaners; there's no pouring involved, so spills are less likely.
EFFECTIVENESS ON SOAP SCUM

Most bathroom cleaners and all general-purpose cleaners are
highly effective at cleaning soap scum. For really difficult-to-clean
surfaces, you can improve the product's performance by leaving it
on the soap scum slightly longer than the time recommended on
the label.
EFFECTIVENESS ON j!1IWEW

Despite label claims, few bathroom cleaners are very effective at
removing mildew. Most products including all-purpose cleaners
are largely ineffective in getting rid of mildew that accumulates in
the grout on a tiled surface. A better approach is to apply an effective cleaner before mildew has accumulated. Common household chlorine bleach is highly effective and economical for killing
and remOVing mildew (refer to the section on BJeaches).
Many cleaners ·claim to diSinfect, and they may indeed get rid
of some microorganisms for a while. But trying to kill microorganisms in an unsterile environment is futile. As soon as you eliminate some germs, they're replaced by others.

46

HOUSE CLEANING

SURFACE DAMAGE

You may spill a bit of cleaner and not notice the spill for hours.
Quite a few products dull or discolor brass and painted trim. Some
also mar stainless steel surfaces and, rarely, you may find one that
also mars vinyl shower curtains.
Some cleaning products can irritate skin and eyes. A few are
alkaline or acidic enough to warrant the use of rubber gloves.
Some pump spray products can irritate lungs. A few specifically
warn against use by anyone with heart or respiratory problems.
Generally, bathroom cleaners are not too hazardous for a
healthy, reasonably cautious person to use, but read labels
carefully.
A cleaner containing bleach shouldn't be mixed with a product
containing ammonia or acid. Such combinations can produce irritating fumes.
RECOMMENDATIONS

Specialized bathroom cleaners are convenient to use, and some
are very effective on soap scum and mildew. But a good all-purpose cleaner can cost less, clean soap scum at least as well, and
may also do a good job of inhibiting the growth of mildew.
Disposable wet towelettes are unnecessary, even if they are
handy for small jobs. Most are fairly expensive, considering that
you're likely to use them only for light cleaning on small areas.
DRAIN CLEANERS

Most people give very little thought to their household pipes until
one or more of their drains stops working. Then, they face a
choice of several unappealing remedies: Call the plumber, wrestle
with a plunger or a plumber's "snake," or don protective gear and
pour in some chemical drain cleaner. A fourth remedy, one of the

DRAIN CLEANERS

47

new biological treatments on the market, may help keep drains
clear, but it's not good at breaking up an existing clog.
This book doesn't offer any panaceas, just advice on the best
options available for do-it-yourself drain care. As a plumber might
tell you, the typical kitchen clog differs from a bathroom blockage.
Kitchen drains are chiefly plagued by vegetable scraps and
congealed fats . Bathroom drains tend to clog with soap scum
and hair.
The first order of business on a drain should be preventive
maintenance (see section on "Maintaining the Free-Flowing
Drain"). There, biological treatments, designed to speed up the
slow but still flowing drain, can be useful. But if a drain clogs completely, turn to a plunger, snake, or other mechanical device. If
that approach fails, and it's a sink drain that's clogged, you might
consider removing the U-shaped trap in the pipes where sink
clogs often lodge (or removing the cleanout plug, if the trap has
one). Consider a chemical cleaner only if all else has failed. Its
powerful ingredients can cause serious. harm if inhaled or accidentally brought into contact with the skin or eyes. And if the
chemical cleaner doesn't budge the clog, you'll be left with a corrosive mess to clean up.
MAiNTAINING mE FREE-FLOWING DRAIN

A few preventive measures will limit the likelihood that you'll have
a clogged drain .
• Avoid pouring grease down the kitchen sink.
• Be sure sinks, tubs, and showers have strainers to trap food,
hair, and the like. Regularly clean the strainers, and periodically
remove and clean the drain-plug mechanism in bathroom sinks
and tubs. That mechanism is a common place for hair that can
escape the strainer to lodge and form an obstruction. The hair,

48

HOUSE CLEANING

in turn, can become a filter for soap, skin oils, and other
residues carried by the water.
• Pouring hot water into a drain is unlikely to clear a clog, but a
weekly dose of boiling water can be effective to maintain a
freely running drain. Heat about a gallon of water, pour in half,
wait a few minutes, and then pour in the rest. Be careful to
pour the water directly down the drain, not on .the basin, tub,
or toilet. Boiling water could crack the porcelain; it can also inactivate a biological drain. opener. So do not use hot water any
sooner than the residence time mandated by the biological
drain opener's directions.
BIOLOGICAL TREATMENTS

Household drains rarely clog without warning. Unless suddenly
blocked by an object, they tend to run slower as impediments accumulate. Biological drain treatments are designed to keep pipes
cleaner and clearer by introducing bacteria that feed on the' organic matter in those accumulations. ·
Biological treatments are often marketed as a safer alternative
to pouring chemical cleaners down your · drains Ca reasonable
claim, given the chemicals' proven hazards). Some treatments are
sold through catalogs that specialize in "environmentally friendly"
products; others are sold in hardware and grocery stores.
Some treatments claim to use enzymes to stage an initial hitand-run attack on organic matter in the pipes, notably grease and
soap . .But the real muscle in biological treatments comes from microorganisms that break down and digest that organic material.
The bugs eventually flourish in the pipes to provide a continuous,
live-in cleanup crew.
Microorganisms don't eat just anything. Hair, for example, being
rather indigestible, is not on their menu. But the bacteria in the

DRAIN CLEANERS

49

treatments do eat away at the sticky organic stuff that often binds
hair and other materials together, or the material that holds it to
pipes. It takes time for the bugs to reach their full effectiveness.
All the biologicals Consumers Union tested require at least one
overnight application, during which time the drain cannot be
used. Most treatments require two to five initial applications to
get the bug colony established. After that, some bacteria are regularly washed out as the drain is used, so all treatments recommend a regular monthly "maintenance" application. Avoid
pouring boiling water, bleach, disinfectants, solvents, and other
enemies of bacteria into a treated drain.
Don't expect results from a biological treatment when a drain
is blocked by an obstruction made of wood, plastic, or some
other material not in the bugs' diet.
While they are noncorrosive, biological treatments are not entirely benign. The packaging for most biologicals warns of harm
from swallowing, and some labels also recommend avoiding
contact with skin, eyes, and respiratory passages.
MECHANICAL OPENERS

Drain clogs are subject to two kinds of physical assault by the
rnechanical devices tested by Consumers Union: pressure from a
pump, hose-end bladder, or plunger, and drilling through by a
plumber's auger, also known as a "snake."
All the mechanical openers should work fine on a soft, fatty
kitchen clog. But the pumps and plungers may not be able to
cope reliably with a bathroom clog (which may be a concoction
of such materials as facial tissue, toilet tissue, soap, toothpaste,
and human hair). Snakes, however, should have no such trouble.
They snag onto the meshed hair and haul out the entire plug.
All the mechanical devices are safe enough to use, but all do

50

HOUSE CLEANING

require some strength and skill to use effectively. And each type
has its drawbacks. The auger must be threaded through openings
in any cross bars or strainers, and the holes may be too small to
accommodate the cable tip. Also, the auger must be turned as it's
fed into the pipe, a task that's sometimes hard for one person to
accomplish. No auger can be used through a garbage~disposal
unit, and some may even have trouble negotiating the trap below
the sink. (They can, however, be fed into the open pipe after the
trap is removed.)
Hose-end bladders can't be used at all through crossbars or
strainers. And a plunger (or any other pressure device) is ineffective if the drain has a vent between the sink and the clog that can't
be sealed when the device is used. (Duct tape or a wet rag makes
an effective temporary seal for the vents usually found below the
faucet in bathroom sinks and tubs.)
It makes sense to keep a couple of mechanical drain openers
around the house. A snake is the most versatile device, since it can
both break up a greasy clog and snag clumps of hair. Unlike a
pressure device such as a plunger, the snake can remove all or
part of a blockage, limiting the chance that the clog will be liberated only to flow down the drain and cause trouble elsewhere.
Among the pressure devices, a plunger is the best bet for reasons of price, convenience, and versatility. Any plunger can be
used on a sink or tub blockage. However, those models with a
fold-out cup have the edge when tackling toilet clogs.
CHEMICAL CLEANERS

Chemical drain cleaners are among the most hazardous products
sold for household use. All highly corrosive, they can injure eyes
and mucous membranes on contact, and ordinary skin in only seconds. Chemical drain cleaners include liquid lye-and-bleach mixes

DRAIN CLEANERS

51

and granular lyes, which are strongly alkaline, and concentrated
liquid acids.
Even when diluted, chemical drain cleaners can attack not only
the organic matter in clogs but also metal pipes (especially the thin
brass pipes often found under sinks) and porcelain surfaces. The
heat the cleaners release as they work may soften plastic pipes
and weaken the cemented joints between them. In fact, concentrated sulfuric acid can release so much heat in a drain that the liquid boils, which may send a small geyser of corrosive liquid back
out of the drain.
Worst · of all, a chemical drain opener may not work and will
leave you with a blocked drain full of corrosive liquid. That's especially likely if the blockage lies not in the U-shaped trap under
the fixture but farther along in the pipe, where the cleaner may
never reach.
Even if the chemicals do make it to the clog, they're likely to
do a mediocre job at best: That ho-hum performance makes it all
too likely that several applications of a cleaner will be required to
clear a clog, further compounding the 'hazards of using one of
these products.
The granular lye products may even create their own blockages.
If you pour in more than the recommended amount, there's a
chance the granules will form a solid mass. You or the plumber
may then be forced to remove the original obstruction and the
cake of lye.
Safer drain cleaners that use noncorrosive solvents in place of
lye and acid have reached the market in recent years. But none
has succeeded in Consumers Union's tests.
Consumers Union is reluctant to recommend any chemical
drain cleaner, either for tackling a clog or (as some manufacturers
recommend) as preventive medicine for slow drains, and strongly

52

HOUSE CLEANING

advises against acid-based drain cleaners. Concentrated sulfuric or
hydrochloric acid is too risky for amateurs to use and too
dangerous to keep around the house, especially if there are
children about.
SAFETY
The labels of chemical drain cleaners contain multiple warnings
and precautions. In the case of accidental personal contact with
a chemical drain cleaner, immediately flush the area with copious amounts of cool water and continue to do so while someone contacts a poison control center or a medical doctor for
instructions.

GARBAGE BAGS
Plastic garbage bags didn't even exist 30 years ago. People typically reused paper grocery bags for their kitchen scraps and
burned yard waste, raked it into the street, or threw it into large
metal trash cans. Then they got on with their lives.
You can still reuse other types of bags, of course, but most
Americans don't: Nearly 8 in 10 consider plastic garbage bags a
household staple. If you're among them, you've probably found that
choosing a bag may mean deciding among hundreds of brands.
Why the proliferation? Manufacturers are trying to grab shelf
space from competitors and ring up higher sales by adding anything shoppers might favor,whether it's a drawstring closure, a
scent designed to ward off animals, or a pastel color.
The confusion doesn't end there. Garbage bags are marketed
under different names: trash, rubbish, scrap, wastebasket, kitchen,
lawn, and leaf; and on variations of those themes: tall kitchen,
large kitchen, and large trash and lawn bags. That makes it easy
to pick up the wrong size. What's more, bag size may vary con-

GARBAGE BAGS

How

"GREEN"

Is My

53

GARBAGE?

Garbage bags themselves are an example of wasteful consumption, since they're designed to be used once and thrown away.
The u.s. Environmental Protection Agency estimates that plasticbag waste takes up 2.4 percent of all landfill space.
One "green" option, of course, is to reuse bags you already
have instead of buying new ones. Nearly any bag from a department store or grocery store is suitable for paper or other dry, lightweight waste. Plastic supermarket bags are fine for food scraps.
And those bags are free.
Manufacturers can reduce the environmental impact of newly
minted bags by using less plastic. Some manufacturers use recycled plastic (from 10 percent to 100 percent). That includes preconsumer waste (scrap from the manufacture of other products) as
well as postconsumer waste (used milk containers, detergent bottles, grocery sacks, and the like). None of the bags have 100 percent postconsumer waste in their recycled plastic.
How does reEycled plastic affect strength? Consumers Union
compared test data from bags that claimed to have recycled content with data from bags that make no such claim. Although bags
with a small amount of recycled material were as strong and puncture-resistant as bags that make no ciaim, those with 80 percent or
more recycled plastic weren't as tough as the others.
Some towns require yard waste to be put in paper bags, not
plastic, because the material is earmarked for composting.
Consumers Union tested those bags, too. They're essentially puncture proof and are highly resistant to damage when dropped or
dragged. That makes them capable of handling bushes, thorns, or
any debris that's sharp or jagged. Keep filled paper bags under
cover, though: Once they're wet, they're weaker.

54

HOUSE CLEANING

siderably within those groups. As a result, matching the bag to the
trash container can be tricky.
The latest marketing wrinkle targets the "green" consumer. No,
the issue isn't degradability anymore. (The Federal Trade Commission cracked down on unsubstantiated degradability claims a few
years back, and garbage-bag manufacturers have changed their
pitch.) Now, many of them tout the use of recycled plastic. That's
laudable. However, the trend toward more environmentally
friendly products is driven by government regulation as much as
by anything else.
How do you tell which bag is most robust? You might think that
the number of plies, sometimes noted on the package, is a reliable
barometer. Not necessarily, according to Consumers Union tests.
Nor is there a clear correlation between the thickness of the plastic and the bag's quality. Some bags boast that they're extra-heavy
duty, or made of high-performance or concentrated plastic. When
scrutinized by Consumers Union engineers, however, many bags,
and their claims, didn't pass muster.
To find out which claims are worth listening to and which bags
are worth buying, Consumers Union sent shoppers in 14 states to
buy bags. The 55 products they found included name brands,
store brands, and bags from mail-order catalogs. For comparison

A NUMBERS GAME?
TYPE OF BAG

Waste
Tall kitchen
Trash
Lawn and leaf

USUAL CAPACITY
4--S gal.
13 gal.
30-33 gal.
39 gal.

GARBAGE BAGS

55

purposes, a paper lawn and leaf bag was also tested; in many
towns, residents are required to use such bags.
Consumers Union subjected the bags to laboratory tests and
asked staffers to use them at home. In most cases, staffers' judgments and lab results agreed.
Most garbage bags will work fine if used to hold only lightweight trash. If you need a bag that can handle heavier stuff, keep
several things in mind:
• You can't judge a bag by its price or name. Inexpensive bags
sold by mass merchandisers and by supermarkets sometimes
outperformed the nationally advertised brands.
• Some bags that did well overall didn't do well in every test.
• The quality of particular brands wasn't always consistent from
size to size.
• Some individual products performed inconsistently from bag
to bag.
SIZING THEM

Up

The table on page 54 shows the typical categories and sizes of
garbage bags. Some makers, however, tag their bags with labels
that confound the issue.
All the kitchen bags tested mated easily with the standard '
kitchen wastebasket. Best are those with a star-shaped seam at
their base instead of the usual horizontal seam. They sit flush
against the bottom of the wastebasket.
Most trash bags claim to fit inside 30-gallon garbage cans. In reality, many fit, but barely, and not without a struggle. Such problems exist because garbage-can capacity is measured in different
ways when filled to the brim or with the lid on, for instance. And
cans rated at the same capacity come in different heights, widths,

56

HOUSE CLEANING

and shapes. As long as no industry standard exists, some bags
won't fit some cans.
THICK OR THIN?

Common sense suggests that thicker is better, but that's not always
true. The type of plastic, the quality and amount of recycled ma~
terial, and the manufacturing process also come into play. Kitchen
bags measuring '/2 mil (a mil is a thousandth of an inch) thick were
sometimes tougher than bags twice as thick.
To further muddle the picture, Consumers Union often found
the same brand in two labeled thicknesses, depending on where
the bags were purchased.
Thickness claims may also be misstated. Consumers Union measured 20 samples of each brand with an electr~nic caliper and discovered that eight brands, mostly lawn and leaf bags, were
significantly thinner than the manufacturer had noted.
PlASTICS

Most garbage bags are made from one of three polyethylene
resins. Some brands specify their type of plastic; with others, you
can often tell by feeling the bag. It can pay to know, because the
type of plastic has some bearing on how well a bag will stand
up in use.
Bags made of low-density polyethylene (LDPE) are soft and pliable. Those made of linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE) are
stret~?ier. Their main asset: resistance to tearing. Bags made of
high-density polyethylene (HDPE) are stiffer and more translucent
than the others, and they crunch like tissue paper when touched.
Because the material is inherently tough and resists punctures,
HDPE bags can be made thinner than others without compromiSing strength. One drawback with HDPE: A little nick easily turns
into a big rip.

GARBAGE BAGS

57

CLOSING TIME

Most bags come with wire twist ties, plastic key-lock tabs, or some
variation of a drawstring. Twist ties provide a tight seal and are
simple to use: Merely wrap one around the neck of the bag and
give it a couple of turns. On the other hand, twist ties are
sometimes too short to wrap securely around a bag. And they're
easy to lose.
With plastic tabs, you thread one end through a loop at the
other end, then pull. Like twist ties, tabs are easily lost. And as
you'll find out, if you tty to add another crumpled napkin to a
sealed bag once locked, they're hard to unlock.
Staffers who used bags at home liked drawstrings because
they're easy to manipulate and there are no small parts to lose.
Once the bag is full, you tug and knot the string to close it. On
the other hand, the seal may not close completely. Trash and
odors may escape; moisture and animal scavengers may get inside. Drawstrings also can be flimsy. During drag-and-drop tests,
Consumers Union hoisted the bags by their drawstrings. Some
stretched like Silly Putty; others snapped apart.
Less common are handle ties, which look like suspenders atop
the bag's shoulders. You close a handle tie by knotting the two
loops like the laces of a shoe. That ensures a tight seal. Draping
the handles around a container can be a problem, though.
DISPENSE WIlli

IT

Garbage bags usually come folded and packaged in cartons. You
remove them from the box as you would tissues, one at a tim'e.
More of a chore are bags that are packaged in a roll and connected by perforations. You pull the end of the roll through a slit
in the packaging and tear off the next bag. Some staffers who used
those bags at home complained that the rolls unfurled or that it
was hard to tear off just one bag.

58

HOUSE CLEANING

HANDHELD VACUUM CLEANERS
The most popular type of handheld vacuum operates on rechargeable batteries and can be carried easily from room to room. But
hand vacuums with cords offer serious competition, since they can
extend vacuuming beyond the length of time that a typical
rechargeable model allows.
Handheld vacuums offer extras such as revolving· power
brushes to beat dirt out of carpeting, as well as an assortment of
attachments and extensions designed especially for nooks, crannies, drapes, and ceilings. In addition, cordless models come with
a wall-mounted storage bracket that has a built-in battery charger.
Car vacuums, which plug into an automobile'S cigarette-lighter
socket, look much like the cordless models, but they come without a wall storage bracket.
CLEANING ABILITY

Most cordless models rely solely on suction to do the job. The
suction end typically tapers to an oblong slot some three
inches wide.
Plug-in models, on the other hand, generally provide wider
coverage. They often come with a built-in five- or six-inch revolving brush well suited to cleaning rugs. The plug-ins tend to be
heavier than the cordless models and auto vacuums.
Consumers Union tested cleaning ability with a variety of soils
spread across a smooth wood surface that simulated hardwood
flooring. A hand vacuum should be able to deal with such items
as granulated sugar, rice, and bread crumbs.
Low-pile carpeting littered with tougher material, however,
highlighted the advantage most plug-in models enjoy over their
cordless cousins. To retrieve, say, potting soil from a carpet, most
cordless vacuums and car vacuums need 20 to 30 passes; a good

HANDHELD VACUUM CLEANERS

59

plug-in model, with its spinning brushes, may need just 5 to 10
passes. Hand vacuums without revolving brushes have a tougher
time with beach sand.
Gravel may destroy plastic fan blades or scrape particles of
plastic from the innards of some plug-in models. Cordless or car

WHEN BATIERIES

Go BAD

The rechargeable nickel-cadmium batteries in cordless hand vacuums should accept hundreds of charges. But eventually the clock
runs out even on those batteries. Ln the past, Consumers Union
testers have found that batteries are difficult to replace in many
hand-vacuum models.
Having a manufacturer's service center replace the batteries can
vary greatly in price. 'Spending, say, $15 to replace the batteries in,
say, a $70 ~r $80 appliance makes sense. But hand vacuums often
cost much less than that, so in some cases it may pay simply to replace the entire vacuum.
A decision to throwaway the vacuum poses an environmental
problem, The cadmium in nicad batteries is toxic and can leach
out of landfills to contaminate groundwater supplies. Incineration
can release the metals into toe air, an even greater hazard.
Some companies will accept their old cordless products for
proper disposal. Check with the manufacturer before you trash an
appliance.
A growing number of states require that the batteries ·in cordless appliances be easy to remove so they can be disposed of separately, Consumers Union recommends that you consider ease of
battery removal and cost of battery replacement when purchasing
any rechargeable appliance,

60

HOUSE

CLEANING

vacuums won't suffer similar damage, since their filter cup intercepts large debris before it reaches any moving parts.
CONVb"NIENCE

A revolving brush gives the plug-in vacuums an edge in cleaning
carpeting, but it's a mixed blessing. The action of the brush is so
vigorous in some models that it competes with their suction, flinging coarser soils about instead of helping to ingest them. Here are
some other factors to consider:
Edge cleaning. The narrow nozzle of most cordless models can
slip into tighter spots than can the broad brush head of the plugin models.
Fallout. Most vacuums have a trap or a flap in the intake designed
to prevent debris from dropping back onto the floor when the vacuum is switched off. None works perfectly.
Blowby. Sometim~s the filters in these vacuums don't stop dust or
grit from shooting out through vent holes. It's a good idea to wear
eye protection when you vacuum coarse debris.
Noise. The noise these vacuums make measured at arm's length
with a sound-level meter tends to track their cleaning prowess
(the louder they are the better they clean), especially with
plug-in models. The noisiest are about as loud as a regular
vacuum cleaner.
FEATURES

Some of the vacuums include attachments that can change their
basic character. There may be, for instance, a snap-o~ revolving
brush to convert an ordinary vacuum snout of a cordless model
into a vacuuming carpet sweeper, like that on most plug-in models. But the add-on piece places a heavy burden on the batteries,
Significantly reducing their ability to run the cleaner before an
overnight charge is needed.

HANDHELD VACUUM CLEANERS

61

A few plug-in models work the opposite way: An accessory
hose lets you convert a built-in revolving brush to a suction-only
nozzle.
Here are some other noteworthy features to consider:
Dual speeds. Several vacuums offer two motor settings. Others
let you reduce suction by opening an air intake. Less suction
may be useful for vacuuming curtains, blinds, or loose-fitting
upholstery.
Brushes, wands, nozzles. On a power-brush model, snap-on
dust brushes let you gently rake upholstery. And on suction-only
models, they improve carpet cleaning by stirring up the embedded
litter. A wandlike crevice tool powerfully focuses suction in small
areas, while a broad floor nozzle lets you cover more area quicker.
RECOMMENDATlONS

A power cord would seem to compromise the main advantage
of a handheld vacuum. But an extra-long cord (some are 25
feet) may make a plug-in vacuum an attractive alternative to a
cordless model.
Plug-in models are strong performers, and some provide much
greater dirt capacity than that available with a cordless vacuum.
DEALING WIm WET SPILLS

A few cordless vacuums are wet/dry models. They're designed to
sip up the proverbial spilled milk, or even the contents of a
tipped goldfish bowl. Since they are cordless, there's no shock
hazard.
You should clean the vacuum (a messy job) after every wet
use, lest the soggy contents turn stagnant. It might be easier to
use a sponge in the first place.

62

HOUSE CLEANING

Most have a broad revolving brush, which helps them make quick
work of a variety of soils ground into a rug.

OVEN CLEANERS
Use oven cleaners only on shiny porcelain-coated metal surfaces,
or glass. Never use them on continuous-cleaning (dull finish) or
self-cleaning oven finishes or on bare metal.
Some oven-cleaning products contain lye, one of the most dangerous substances sold for household use. Baked-on oven dirt is
too tough for ordinary cleaners. Lye causes a chemical reaction,
decomposing the stuck-on fats and sugars into soapy compounds
you can wash away. Lye-containing oven cleaners are corrosively
alkaline and reactive enough to cause serious burns, which is why
labels on such products contain long lists of warnings.
Some oven cleaners on the market are aerosol sprays, which
are convenient to apply but hard to aim neatly. Clouds of aerosol
mist deposit cleaner not only on oven walls but perhaps also on
heating elements, thermostats, and light fixtures, and in your
lungs. Such product labels warn you not to inhale the fumes. But
some other application methods and container deSigns protect
you better.
Still, any product that contains lye must be used with extreme
caution. Lye can burn skin and eyes. Inhaled droplets can actually
burn the throat and lungs. Before using any cleaner containing lye,
you should don safety goggles, a long-sleeved shirt, and rubber
gloves. If you're using an aerosol, you should also wear a paper
dust mask (to keep from inhaling the droplets) along with protective goggles.
Not only should you take steps to protect yourself from the
corrosive effects of lye, you should protect nearby floors, counters, and other surfaces. Spread newspaper on the floor in

OVEN CLEANERS

63

front of the oven. Take care not to splash any of the cleaner on
aluminum, copper, or painted surfaces outside the oven, and
keep it off the heating element, gaskets, and light fixture inside
the oven.
Another way to avoid dangerous fumes and corrosive spatters
is to use an aerosol cleaner without lye. Instead of using lye to
break down oven grime, such products use a combination of
organic surfactants that are activated by heat. This type of product
doesn't have to carry a long list of warnings on its label. It isn't
likely to damage kitchen surfaces. You don't have to arm yourself
with rubber gloves and a face mask to use it because it isn't likely
to irritate.
PACKAGING

An oven cleaner's packaging affects its convenience of use and
safety. Oven-cleaning products come in several forms such as pad,
aerosol, brush-on jelly, and pump spray. All have drawbacks.
Because they don't create airborne lye particles, pads are a relatively safe way to apply oven cleaner, as long as you've covered
your hands and forearms. Aerosols are easy to apply, but they're
also easy to get on gaskets, heating elements, and sometimes your
face by mistake. A broad, concave button makes it harder to mis.
direct the spray than a small button.
Not only is it tedious to paint an entire oven with brush-on jelly,
it's almost impossible to keep the jelly from spattering. Finally, a
hand-pumped spray can be a real annoyance. Some products have
an adjustable nozzle that produces anything from a stream to a
misty, broad spray. The stream doesn't cover much and it splatters, and the spray is unnecessarily diffuse and easy to inhale.
RECOMMENDATIONS

The instructions that come with self-cleaning ovens warn against

64

HOUSE CLEANING

using commercial oven cleaners. Wording varies, but a basic warning reads "Do not use commercial oven cleaners or oven protective coatings around any part of the self-cleaning oven." This is
because the cleaners may damage the porcelain finish during the
high-temperature cleaning cycle.
Even if you lack a self-cleaning or continuous-cleaning oven,
you aren't necessarily sentenced to the hard labor of cleaning your
oven. An oven in continual use can reach a steady state at which
grease and grime burn off at the same rate they accumulate.
Serious spills, such as when a cake overflows its pan, can be
scraped up after the oven cools. A little dirt in the oven never hurt
anybody; a little oven cleaner might. So you can skip using an
oven cleaner. But if you feel otherwise, then choose a noncaustic
oven cleaner.

PAPER TOWELS
Some brands of paper towel are available nationwide, but there
are many regional and store brands, too. In some cases, towels
of a nationally known brand may vary somewhat from region
to region.
Manufacturers try to control a larger share of the market by selling a variety of brands, aiming a premium one, for example, at
consumers who believe that a high price connotes high quality
and aiming a moderately priced one at consumers who treat one
roll of towels pretty much like any other. One supermarket executive termed premium-priced towels "overspecified"-meaning
they are thicker and heavier than they need to be. The overspecified towel gives the advertiser something to brag about and helps
justify the generally higher price, which in turn pays for
both the manufacturing costs and the heavy advertising and promotion expenses.

PAPER TOWELS

65

Paper towels lead a brief and unglamorous life. They're typically called upon to scour a dirty oven, sop up a kitchen spill, or
wipe a window, and then within moments they're gone. And yet,
to perform these seemingly unexacting tasks, paper towels need
disparate qualities:
Even when wet, they should withstand scrubbing without
falling apart .
• For mopping up, a costly but highly absorbent towel can be as
economical as a cheap but less absorbent towel. For spilled
salad dressing or motor oil, a poor-quality towel may smear the
spill rather than absorb it.
•

But for many other uses, most products will do the job.
Towels should separate cleanly at their perforations; otherwise,
you may be left holding either a torn sheet or more sheets than
you need. Generally, the two-ply towels detach more evenly than
the one-ply towels.
Paper towels with short, weakly anchored fibers tend to
shed lint, a particular problem when you clean a mirror or
Windowpane.
Softness is relatively unimportant in a paper towel, at least according to an informal poll of more than 60 Consumers Union
staffers. Soft towels are usually more absorbent, but they may not
hold up as well during scouring.
RECOMMENDATIONS

The strongest, most absorbent towels are likely to be the premium-priced brands. Use an economical one for everyday chores.
For more demanding tasks-like picking up a large spill or cleaning a carpet-you might want to buy a roll of strong and absorbent, relatively expensive towels to keep around the house.

66

HOUSE CLEANING

Paper towels are the second largest "loss leader" in stores. Wait
for a sale of your favorite product and stock up with enough to
last you until the next sale.
USING PAPER TOWELS WITH MICROWAVE OVENS

For modest microwaving chores like steaming fish or poultry,
cooking vegetables or bacon, or preparing hot sandwiches, it's
wise to wrap or cover the food with white paper towels. They
keep the oven clean by absorbing spattered grease and excess
moisture and help to keep certain foods from drying out or becoming soggy. But are some paper towels better than others for
microwaving?
Some manufacturers sell brands that they claim are specially
formulated for microwave tasks. "Microwave" paper-towel brands
are identical to their regular siblings except that they are claimed
to be food grade (FDA approved for food contact), having fewer
heavy metals. But for simple microwaving, there is no need to pay
extra for these specialty products. Any strong, absorbent, plain
white (unprinted) paper towel should do.
TOUGHER TOWELS FOR TOUGH JOBS

Shop towels are for cleaning up grime in the garage or workshop,
scrubbing away rust, and other tasks too tough for ordinary paper
towels. Shop towels made of paper are throwaways; cloth towels
are meant to be washed and reused.
Shop towels tend to be stronger than most ordinary paper towels. Of course, cloth shop towels are far stronger than any of the
paper products.
Both paper and cloth shop towels clean greasy tools and effectively scrub rust. Some ordinary paper towels might tend to shred
a bit but should do the job nevertheless.

SCOURING CLEANSERS

67

Paper shop towels absorb water faster than their cloth counterparts. After several washings to remove their sizing, the cloth shop
towels still don't absorb water as quickly but are fine for oil.
Paper shop towels are certainly more convenient than cloth.
But the cloth shop towels are cheaper if they're used at least 10
times. (Household rags, of course, are cheaper still.)
SCOURING CLEANSERS
It used to be that the more abrasive a scouring powder was, the

more effectively it cleaned and the more surely it eroded porcelainenamel finishes and the decorative polish of cookware and acrylic
vanities.
Today's cleansers claim to remove soil and stains without damaging the surface being cleaned. Liquid cleansers, introduced in
the 1970s, replaced gritty particles, such as silica, with softer abrasives like calcium carbonate. Today, both liquids and powders derive much of their cleaning strength from detergent, bleach, and
other alkaline or acidic ingredients. The detergent in the cleanser
helps loosen soil and cut grease; the bleach aids in removing
many stains, especially from scratched and dented surfaces; and
the other ingredients enhance a cleanser's effectiveness on a variety of stains.
The gentlest cleansers will leave few or no marks even on a
piece of glass (similar in hardness to the porcelain in bathtubs and
sinks). A slightly abrasive cleanser leaves light hairline scratches
on glass panels and is more likely to erode surfaces over time.
Moderately abrasive cleansers leave a silky smooth frosting of
scratches, although nothing like the deep marks left by old-time
abrasive cleansers.
A good product, if inadvertently spilled and not wiped up,

68

HOUSE CLEANING

shouldn't leave marks on chrome, imitation marble (usually
acrylic), fiberglass, glass, or glazed tile. But watch your pots and
pans: A number of cleansers dull or discolor aluminum, copper, or
other metals if not wiped off after application.
Most cleansers do well on difficult-ta-remove soil and on a variety
of stains such as pot marks and tea stains on a kitchen sink. Some are
especially effective on particular types of difficult stains (such as rust
and hard-water deposits) and are labeled accordingly.
SAFETY

Cleansers containing ble,ach or acid shouldn't be mixed with ammonia or other cleansers-the combination can produce dangerous fumes. Cleansers usually warn about this on the labeL
Some cleansers are strongly alkaline or acidic and could irritate
your skin. You might also want to remove your jewelry and wear
rubber gloves when cleaning with them.
Be especially careful in the use and storage of rust-removing
cleansers. They may contain oxalic acid. If so, they will provide
warnings regarding the hazards involved.
When you're cleaning a new surface or using a new cleanser,
first try it on an inconspicuous corner, wipe it off, and check for
marring. Over time, of course, even a gentle product may cause
some damage, which is why it's important to use a light touch and
a soft applicator, and wipe residues up after each use.
For cleaning with a light touch, apply the cleanser with a cellulose sponge. If this fails on a very soiled surface, cautiously try
a more aggressive applicator (e.g., steel wool or copper mesh
pads), a plastic mesh pad, or a reinforced sponge.
RECOMMENDATIONS

Today's cleansers tend to be very good to excellent in overall
cleaning ability. They range in abrasiveness from negligible to

SCOURING CLEANSERS

69

slight to moderate. Liquid cleansers tend to have the lowest abrasiveness, while powders occur at all levels. For delicate surfaces,
first try the cleanser in an inconspicuous place.
A barely abrasive product can do an excellent cleaning job,
even on tough soils. If you have some very demanding jobs, like
scraping crusted soil off old pots and pans or cleaning a badly
abraded porcelain sink, you will probably need a moderately abrasive product. If you have rust or hard-water stains, you might consider special cleansers labeled for this purpose.
Cleansers are not appropriate for all chores in the kitchen
and bathroom. You'll want a good all-purpose cleaner to take care
of ordinary soil on floors, walls, countertops, range surfaces, and
the like.

TOILET BOWL CLEANERS
A common cause of persistent toilet-bowl staining is minerals that
build up around the waterline and under the rim. The culprit is
usually hard water, which has a high mineral content. As the water
evaporates, minerals such as whitish calcium or magnesium compounds and rust-colored iron compounds are left behind, coating
the upper part of the bowl and eventually hardening into a scale.
Even with soft water, molds can form a dark coating in the bowl.
If the ceramic surface is slick, such deposits hardly find a foothold.
But if the surface has been scratched by abrasive cleaners or
roughened with age, the buildup can grow rapidly.
Automatic, in-tank cleaners are the easiest to use but generally
only mask the dirt. The "real" cleaners are the liquid and granular
in-bowl cleaners that are meant to be used with a brush.
IN-BOWL CLEANf:<.'RS

Most in-bowl cleaners use acid to dissolve mineral scale and erad-

70

HOUSE CLEANING

icate stains. Active agents may include hydrochloric, phosphoric,
or oxalic acids; some granular cleaners use sodium bisulfate,
which when dissolved works like acid. Brands with the highest
acidity have the greatest potential for cleaning. Products with
lower acid content may require more cleaner, more time, or more
muscle to do the job.
Nonacidic liquids may not be very effective at removing mineral stains. But they should work well on nonmineral stains that
can be brushed away readily.
You might try a dash of liquid all-purpose cleaner. Brushed on,
it can clean a lightly soiled bowl quite satisfactorily for less than
the cost of in-bowl cleaners.
Compared with liquids, powders are less convenient to apply
around the bowl and under the rim.
The chemicals in toilet bowl cleaners are powerful and should
be handled carefully. Never mix an in-bowl cleaner with other
household chemicals (including in-tank toilet cleaners). To do so
could release toxic fumes .
IN-TANK CLEANERS

Some in-tank products rely on blue dye to tint the water and hide
the dirt that accumulates between scrubbings. Although blue
cleaners generally contain detergent and other ingredients to curb
stains, some do not actually claim to clean a dirty bowl. With some
in-tank cleaners, then, the question is not how well it works but
how long it lasts. Don't be too quick to change containers when
the blue vanishes. Check to see if the dispensing valve has
clogged or if the product is actually used up.
Some blue cleaners claim to deodorize. If you sniff packages on
the store shelf, you may notice wintergreen, pine, or lemon scents.
Indeed, the packages sometimes have a very strong smell. But

TOILET BOWL CLEANERS

71

once the cleaner dissolves in the tank, the scent may be practically
imperceptible.
Some in-tank cleaners slowly dispense chlorine bleach to
lighten stains and give off a scent that many people associate with
cleanliness. These products may contain pebbles of calcium
hypochlorite bleach.
The amount of bleach such cleaners release can vary considerably from flush to flush. Typically, it's very little. However, they
release enough chlorine to bleach stains, since the water may
stand in the bowl for hours. But when a toilet isn't flushed at least
once a day, the bleach may become more concentrated and
may damage parts inside the tank. Some plumbing-fixture manufacturers recommend against using in-tank cleaners containing
hypochlorite bleach.
Since chlorine is not as visible as blue dye, you might not
know when to replace a bleach-based bowl cleaner. If your water
is chlorinated, your nose may not tell you. You can use a drop
of food coloring in the bowl as a test. If the coloring lasts for
more than a few minutes, it means that the bleach-based cleaner
is spent.
RECOMMENDATIONS

The best way to clean the toilet bowl is to brush it frequently with
a liquid all-purpose cleaner. In-bowl toilet cleaners are for more
serious stains. Scrubbing with an acidic powder or liquid is the
one sure way to attack the mineral matter that causes most toilet
bowl stains, particularly around the rim.
In-tank cleaners, blue-colored or bleaches, are easy to use,
but don't expect miracles. If you start with a spotless toilet,
they may only slow the , buildup of new stains and keep the
bowl presentable between more thorough scrubbings. In-tank

72

HOUSE CLEANING

bleach cleaners should not be used in a toilet that isn't flushed
regularly. Enough chlorine may accumulate to damage parts inside
the tank.
Finally, do not let any brand's claims to disinfect sway you. At
best, a disinfecting cleaner can only temporarily cut the population of some germs.
VACUUM CLEANERS
The two classic kinds of vacuum cleaner, upright and canister,
have become more alike. Each has borrowed features from the
other and become more versatile. Most upright vacuums now have
a flexible hose and tools to vacuum crevices, upholstery, and furniture-tasks that were once the canister vacuum's alone. And, for
carpet cleaning, many canisters now have a power nozzle-a
smaller, detachable version of the upright's built-in power head.
(Power heads and power nozzles use a rotating beater brush to
deep-clean carpeting.)
Upright vacuums remain the most popular choice, outselling
canister models by more than five to one. You should probably
give first consideration to an upright vacuum. Among other advantages, it's likely to be easier to handle than a canister vacuum,
and probably less expensive. A canister model might suit you if
you vacuum mostly bare floors. The floor brush of a good canister vacuum may do a better job on flooring than the power head
of an upright vacuum, whose brushes may disperse debris before
it can be vacuumed up.

How THEY CLEANED
Nothing matters more in a vacuum cleaner, obviously, than how
well it picks up dust and debris.
Carpet cleaning. Almost any vacuum cleaner can remove most

VACUUM CLEANERS

73

surface debris. Better machines also pluck dirt from deep within
carpet pile. Overall, there is little difference in deep-cleaning
prowess between canisters and uprights. That wasn't the case in
past years, when uprights held an edge.
Air flow. Most vacuum cleaners either pull or push debris-laden
air through a porous vacuum bag that traps the waste. As the bag
fills, air flow diminishes. This reduces the suction the machine can
sustain. Canisters generally outdo uprights at the outset, but most
of the canisters can't hold the edge as their bags fill.
For those times when a vacuum cleaner accidentally inhales
part of a throw rug or drapes, it's handy to have a control that
reduces suction-typically, a valve that uncovers a hole near
the hose's handle. That allows you to pause, extract the fabric,
and continue to vacuum, all without shutting off the machine.
Most canister vacuums have such a suction control; most uprights don't.
CLEARING THE AIR

Even an excellent vacuum cleaner won't necessarily capture all
dust and debris. Some of the waste gets blown around, and some
is vented back into the room through the exhaust port. The particles most likely to escape filtration are minuscule, and can include
fragments of such allergens as pet dander, pollen, and mold
spores. A clean exhaust, then, is an important consideration to
people who are sensitive to such substances.
The top performers are uprights whose suction fan is located in
front of the vacuum bag and pushes air through the bag. That design does have a drawback, however: Because incoming air is
drawn through the fan before it is filtered, there is a chance that a
solid object-a coin, say-will damage the fan's vanes. Machines
with that "push" fan design include all the "soft body" uprights,
which enclose the bag in a fabric pouch, and some of the "hard

74

HOUSE CLEANING

body" uprights, which have a rigid plastic casing. The rest of the
hard-body uprights and all of the canister vacuums are "pullers,"
with fans located downstream of the bag.
The vacuums that emit the most in their exhaust are canisters.
However, even the dirtiest among them doesn't spew forth a visible torrent of debris. But the dust in their exhausts could irritate
some people who are sensitive to airborne allergens. One option,
available on about a third of the machines, is to use "microfiltration bags," which supposedly use electrostatic charges to trap
small particles. If the vacuum cleaner allows a choice of bags, nonallergy sufferers should choose the standard-type bag; they're almost always less expensive than microfiltration bags.
WHAT'S EASIEST TO USE?

If you're a typical vacuum-cleaner owner, you'll live with your machine for years before it breaks. So you want to make sure the one
you buy is as easy to use as possible. Here are some of the factors to consider:
Lugging it. You can usually hoist an upright with one hand.
Canisters require both hands, not only because they're heavy,
but also because you typically have to juggle more components
at a time.
Getting started Most vacuum cleaners have an On/ Off switch
that's easy to operate by hand or foot. A few force you to bend
uncomfortably to reach the switch. Some canisters have a second,
independent switch on or near the handle to control the power
nozzle. That's a plus when an object gets stuck in the brush and
you want to shut off the machine quickly.
Adjusting cleaning height. Deep cleaning goes better when the
beater brushes are adjusted to the right height-too high and they
won't clean deeply, too low and they'll dig into the pile and make

VACUUM CLEANERS

75

the machine hard to push. Some machines claim to adjust the
height automatically. Consumers Union favors machines that allow
you to make the adjustment yourself, preferably using a foot
pedal, and those models that allow the beater brush in the power
head or nozzle to be switched off so that its rotation doesn't blow
dirt around a bare floor.
Pushing and pulling. Once set at the proper height, most uprights are pretty easy to push, especially those with big wheels
or rollers. Self-propelled models require little effort to push
about. However, the power assistance does take getting used to.
And, with the feature turned off, they may be difficult to move
around.
Uprights require more effort to . move about when the hose
is in use than when they're deep cleaning. Some uprights have
a hose that mounts high on the machine, making the vacuum
prone to tip.
Stairs. On stairways, a canister vacuum is generally easier to use
than an upright, whose wide "footprint" often won't fit comfortably on the stair. Vacuuming stairs is easier with a long hose,
which enables you to cover most of the steps with the main unit
at the bottom. You can do a more effective cleaning job on stairs
and along baseboards if there's a minimum of dead space between
the powered brush and the outer edge of its housing. Every power
head or nozzle has such an area in front of and on each side of
the housing.
Cord storage. A vacuum cleaner typically has a 20- to 30-foot
power cord. Canisters usually have a handy built-in winder that
automatically recoils the cord at the press of a button or a yank
of the cord. Uprights typically have two hooks, around which you
wind the cord. If one or both hooks swivel, the cord can be released quickly. However, some machines have awkward, annoy-

76

HOUSE CLEANING

ing ways to store the cord. Others have no way at all to store it.
Whines and roars. Canisters tend to be slightly less noisy than
the uprights, and hard-body uprights less noisy than soft-body
models.
Emptying dust and debris. To dispose of what a vacuum cleaner
has picked up, you almost always have to change a paper bag.
Uprights usually have the largest bags, but bags that are bigger
don't necessarily last longer. Bags often must be replaced not because they're full, but because their pores have clogged, restricting air flow. Some machines have an indicator to let you know
when the bag is full (or if air flow is blocked).
It's often awkward and sloppy to change bags on a soft-body
upright. You may have to place the machine on its back, unzip the
cloth pouch or remove a plastic retainer, and coax the bag's sleeve
over a protruding tube. Removing the old bag without dumping
debris is also a challenge, as is retrieving any spilled dirt from the
bottom of the pouch.
MAiNTAINING THE MACHINE

An object that's stuck in the revolving brush or fan blades can
cause the motor to overheat and burn out. That's why some cleaners, mostly canisters, have a shutoff mechanism. Even if you escape such a calamity, vacuum cleaners still require occasional
upkeep-replacing the brush, the drive belt, or the headlcimp bulb
are examples. Doing the upkeep yourself could not only save you
a repair bill, which averages $40, but also the expense of needless
repairs. Replacing parts yourself is easier on some machines than
on others.
LIGHT VACUUMS FOR LIGHT DunES

No room to store a vacuum cleaner? Want some lightweight assis-

WINDOW CLEANERS

77

tance with quick cleanups? The electric broom, which weighs
about six pounds and usually costs less than $50, promises to
help. An electric broom may be handy for quick (if a little dirty)
once-overs on floors in, say, the kitchen or a small apartment. It
may also be a boon for those with limited mobility or hand
strength, who have trouble using either a full-size vacuum cleaner
or a broom and dustpan.

WINDOW CLEANERS
Squeegee-wielding professionals know that plain water can clean
lightly soiled windows. But if you put off washing your windows
until they're really dirty, you'll need something more potent.
The best glass cleaner is one that works fast and removes grime
with a minimum of help from you. Consumers Union's laboratory
NEWSPAPERS FOR CLEANING WINDOWS

Over the years, there have been many opinions about which
window wipers work best. Professionals do their wiping with
natural-sponge applicators and rubber squeegees. Some purists
feel the job is unfinished without the careful application
of a good chamois leather. Yet others swear by yesterday's
newspaper.
In a Consumers Union test of newspaper used with an effective commercial cleaner on heavily soiled windows, it was found
that newspaper is not very absorbent. It takes a fair amount of
wiping and rubbing to clean and polish a window with it.
Newspaper also blackens hands and leaves ink smudges around
window mullions.

78

HOUSE CLEANING

tests showed that glass cleaners widely vary in their effectiveness.
Many are mediocre. Vinegar brands are generally inferior to
ammonia-based versions.
HOMEMADE RECIPES

Consumers Union's recipes can equal or best many of the
aerosols, sprays, and premoistened towels in the stores. They cost
a fraction of the price for store-bought products~a penny or less
per ounce-and you can easily prepare them at home.

• The Lemon Formula-works for lightly soiled windows. Mix 4
tablespoons of lemon juice in 1 gallon of water.
• The Ammonia Formula-works for heavily soiled windows.
Mix liz cup of sudsy ammonia, 1 pint of rubbing alcohol, and 1
tablespoon of hand dishwashing liquid (do not use more than
1 tablespoon, or streaking may result), and top the mixture up
with enough water to make 1 gallon.
STORE PRODUCTS

A store-bought glass cleaner would cost from around a nickel to a
quarter an ounce. Pump sprays generally carry a lower cost-perounce than do aerosols, and supermarket house brands are generally cheaper than national brands.
With most commercial products, an ounce of cleaner goes
pretty far. It would cost on average only a few pennies to clean
both sides of a heavily soiled window measuring ·2 by 3 feet.
CARE IN USE

Any glass cleaner, even plain water, can soften latex paint on mullions and sills around a window. Therefore, wipe spilled window
cleaner off painted surfaces without hard rubbing. The paint
should reharden once it has dried.

WINDOW CLEANERS

79

THE ENvIRONMENT

Among the usual ingredients in most glass cleaners, none pose
any problems for the environment. None of the cleaners contain
phosphates, and none of the aerosols use ozone-depleting propellants.

Laundry
You can get good laundering results if you sort clothes according
to the following guidelines:
• Separate colors and whites into different laundry loads. Intense
colors (very dark or very bright) may bleed, especially when
washed for the first time. They can tint white or light-colored
clothes washed in the same load. A good guide is the maker's
care label.
• Separate chlorine-bleachable light and white clothes from those
that cannot be bleached if you intend to add chlorine bleach to
the wash.
• Most wash loads do quite well in cold or warm water. Heavy
soils on cottons respond better to a hot-water wash. Hot water
may have an adverse effect on permanent-press garments.
Check each garment's care label.
• Separate very dirty clothes that should be presoaked or washed
in hot water from lightly soiled or temperature-sensitive items.
• Separate sweatshirts, new towels, and products made from chenille yarn (all of which may tend to generate lint) from permanent press clothes and corduroys (which attract lint).
• As you sort wash loads, remember to empty pockets and close
Zippers to prevent snagging. Next, check for troublesome stains
that may have become set. Some stains won't respond well to
81

82

LAUNDRY

a presoak or laundry booster alone, and require special treatment before washing. Check Appendix B: Stain Removal for detailed instructions on removing those stains.
• To keep socks from getting lost, place them at the bottom
of the washing machine tub, wash them in a mesh bag, or
use "sock savers," plastic rings designed to lock pairs of socks
together.
• Do not overload your dryer. Always allow ample room for articles to tumble about freely. Placing too many items in a dryer
can lengthen drying time and cause garments to wrinkle.
Leaving clothes in the dryer's drum after tumbling has stopped
can also cause wrinkling.
• To ensure optimum drying time, be sure to clean the dryer's lint
filter after each use.
For the best ways to cope with laundry, check the following
sections on Bleaches, Boosters, Clothes Washers, Detergents, and
Fabric Softeners.
BLEACHES
Liquid chlorine bleach is the old standby, having earned its place
in the laundry room, bathroom, and kitchen for whitening and removing stains and mildew. But chlorine bleach has its problems,
too. The telltale signs of misuse or overuse of chlorine bleach are
splotches of faded color or white spots where undiluted bleach
has splashed, and fabrics that have faded from vivid to dim or
from blue to pink.
Nonchlorine, "all-fabric" oxygen bleaches promise the benefits
of chlorine bleach without the risk. · However, the real story unfolds in the laundry room.

BLEACHES

83

Chlorine and oxygen bleaches use different active ingredients
that decolorize and solubilize stains so they can be removed with
the help of a detergent. Liquid chlorine bleaches all have about the
same amount of active ingredient, sodium hypochlorite, and there
is little difference from one brand to another. The active ingredient in liquid oxygen bleaches is hydrogen peroxide. In powder
oxygen bleaches it is sodium percarbonate or sodium perborate
tetrahydrate. Oxygen bleaches usually contain other ingredients as
well to help in stain removal.
Chlorine bleaches have always been far better than oxygen
bleaches at whitening clothes. Oxygen bleaches can only maintain
whiteness, not restore it.
HARD-TO-REMoVE STAINS

In general, chlorine or oxygen bleach should be used with a good
laundry detergent to succeed at removing stains. Some oxygen
bleaches are better than chlorine bleaches at reducing or removing tough stains such as red wine.
FADING

Chlorine bleach can cause colors to fade. Initially, it may have no
noticeable effect on the brightness of colors. After a few washings,
however, the chlorine begins taking its toll. Slight fading becomes
evident and then, after more washings, objectionable. An oxygen
bleach will continue being kind to colors much longer.
RECOMMENDATIONS

Chlorine bleach, when usedpropedy, is the most effective way to
whiten fabrics, including some synthetics .. It's ideal for the occasional whitening your wash may need, but knowing how to use
chlorine bleach is essential: Improper and long-term use may take

84

LAUNDRY

its toll on colors and fabric life. Using chlorine bleach may be
tricky, but buying it is simple. The only real difference you are
likely to find is price.
All-fabric oxygen bleaches have the advantage of being safe
with most fabrics and dyes, even over the long term. But they're
much more expensive to use than chlorine bleaches.
A good approach is the occasional use of chlorine bleach on
chlorine-safe white fabrics to deliver the whitening you need.
Never use chlorine and oxygen bleaches together; they will
counteract each other. Use all-fabric bleach to brighten colors
without fading and to whiten fabrics that are not safe for use with
chlorine bleach.
When you use bleach, follow these guidelines:
• Before you bleach, read the garment's care label. If it says "no
bleach," don't use any kind of bleach. Chlorine bleach is usually safe on cottons, linens, and some colorfast fabrics.
• Don't use chlorine bleach on wool, silk, mohair, leather (e.g.,
buttons, Spandex, or noncolorfast fabrics or dyes). If you're unsure about the safety of a bleach for a garment, first do a safety
test on an inside seam as recommended on the bleach's label.
• Never use chlorine bleach with hand dishwashing liquids, ammonia, or toilet cleaners. The combination can produce irritating fumes.
• Chlorine bleach must first be diluted as directed on the product's label. It should then be added 5 to 6 minutes after the
wash cycle has started.
• Oxygen bleach should be added with the laundry detergent to
the wash water before the laundry is added. It is safe on washable fabrics. It works more effectively at higher wash temperatures than at cooler temperatures.

BOOSTERS

85

BOOSTERS
Today's high-performance laundry detergents do not need a laundry booster to remove many common stains. However, some
household stains, such as used motor oil, are too stubborn for
some laundry detergents in ordinary laundering. Stain-fighting
laundry boosters may help a laundry detergent to remove stubborn stains.
Boosters may be available as powders, pump sprays, aerosols,
liquids, and sticks. Regular laundry detergents can also be used as
self-boosters. Liquid laundry detergents are effective stain removers when applied directly to stains before laundering. Powder
laundry detergents should be mixed with a little water and applied
to the stain as a paste-rubbed in with a new, soft toothbrushbefore laundering.
Consumers Union tested the effectiveness of boosters and liquid laundry detergents on eleven different stains on white cottonpolyester fabric: chocolate syrup, makeup, grape juice, spaghetti
sauce, blood, mud, grass, tea, black ink, and used motor oil.
Boosters were used according to label instructions to help an
economy-priced laundry detergent, but without presoaking.
Performance was spotty and disappointing in general. The best
boosters were effective on four to six of the eleven stains; the
other boosters on only one or two. One booster was not effective
at removing any of the stains.
CONVENIENCE

Launderers with a Single-stained garment might like a stick. But
there are situations in which a stick would be decidedly inconvenient. Imagine rubbing a wash load of grass-stained knees, oilstained overalls, and T-shirts dotted with last week's spaghetti
dinner. LiqUids, likewise, must be rubbed in. Sprays are a bit eas-

86

LAUNDRY

ier; you douse stains, then toss the dirty clothes into the washing
machine. When stains are pervasive, you might prefer a powder
that you pour into the machine along with a detergent. But presoaking with a powder is problematic. You can let the stained
clothes soak in the water, but that ties up the machine. A messy
alternative is to let the laundry soak in a tub, then transfer it to
your washing machine.
RECOMMENDATIONS

Laundry detergents are generally so effective that you may not
need a booster if you lead a low-soil life. You can also use the
detergent as a booster as described above. It may make sense,
however, to keep a booster on hand for those inevitable spills
that even the best detergent can't handle. Choose a product based
on your idea of convenience. Some boosters cope quite well
with some stains, but most aren't any more effective than detergent alone.
MAIL-ORDER BOOSTER/SPOT REMOVERS

Consumers Union conducted tests on two specialized spot removers, Amodex Stain Remover (Amodex Products, Inc., P.O. Box
3332, 989 Hancock Avenue, Bridgeport, CT 06065) and Magic
Wand (Edwards Creative Products, P.O. Box 8361, Cherry Hill, NJ
08002). Both performed better, overall, than supermarket boosters.
But they weren't equally effective on all stains. Amodex was better as both a prespotter and spot remover, removing more stains
from more fabrics.

CLOTHES WASHERS
The design of top-loading automatic washing machines has matured to the point that periodic model changes are mostly small re-

CLOTItES WASHERS

87

finements. A manufacturer may change the shape of the agitator,
or restyle the control panel, or replace mechanical controls with
electronic ones.
Except for lower-end models, most machines come with such
amenities as two agitation and spin speeds, variable water-level
controls, and bleach and fabric-softener dispensers. Less expensive models may have somewhat smaller capacities and lack some
of those features or have less elaborate versions of them. Most of
the rather deluxe washers have mechanical controls; several models have electronic controls. "Suds ' saver" models, of which very
few are manufactured, let users recycle the wash water.
Almost all washing machines sold in the United States are toploaders, with wash tubs that rotate around a vertical axis. While
front-loading washers, with wash tubs that rotate around a horizontal axis, are available, very few are sold in the United States.
This is the case even though front-loaders use much less water, energy (mainly in the form of hot water used for washing), and detergent. However, manufacturers expect that within the near
future, DOE energy standards will be much more stringent, and
the most practical way to meet the standard will be with horizontal axis washers. While all horizontal axis machines presently sold
in the United States are front-loaders, future horizontal axis machines may be designed to be loaded from the top. Models of that
design are available in Europe. Present front-loaders sell for $600
to well over $1,000. Whether the new horizontal axis machines
will be sold for as low a price as present top-loaders remains to
be seen.
Just about any washing machine on the market will clean just
fine , provided you use the right cycle, the right amount of detergent, and the right amount of water. Other critical factors are convenience, efficiency (machines that use less water get higher
marks), and load-size capacity.

88

LAUNDRY

For a machine to wash properly, clothes must move around the
tub, toward the agitator, then sink. If that doesn't happen, the
clothes nearest the agitator take a pounding while those around
the side move only slightly.
Consumers Union's testers made up loads of white or lightcolored items plus six "flags"-brightly colored washcloths. The
testers put each machine through its regular cycle with the lid up
so they could count and time the appeara,nce and disappearance
of the flags. If the flags circulated well, the testers ran larger loads
until two flags no longer circulated.
These tests showed considerable differences in capacity. The
size and shape of the tub, the design of the agitator, agitator
speed, and time contribute heavily to those differences.
ENERGY AND m4TER

Water consumption is a critical factor, given the periodic drought
in some parts of the country, the strain that a large load of wash
water imposes on septic systems, and the cost of heating the wash
water. (Providing hot water consumes far more energy than running the washing machine itself.) To monitor water and energy
consumption, tests were run using the warm wash/cold rinse settings that are suitable for most clothes.
Water use. On fa regular cycle with an eight-pound load, water
use ranged from about 40 to 50 gallons. On the permanent-press
cycle, consumption was slightly more. Front-loaders used about
one-half to one-third of the water used by top-loaders.
Washers are most efficient when run at full capacity, using the
highest water level. You can adjust the water level for partial loads,
but you shouldn't try to wash a full load on a partial water fill.
That will hamper the machine's performance and may also damage the clothing.
Energy use. The range of hot-water use for the machines is strik-

CLOTHES WASHERS

89

ing. Assume you do about 42 pounds of clothes per week, or
2,184 pounds per year. One of the more efficient machines would
do that much laundry in about 160 loads, using 1,800 gallons of
hot water per year. A relatively inefficient machine would need
about 240 loads and 2,800 gallons of hot water. That's about 45
percent more. Actual differences would probably be less dramatic
because you wouldn't fill a machine to capacity for every load.
The "suds sa~er." One "suds-saver" machine design, which
should more accurately be termed a water saver, spews wash
water into a tub or sink next to the machine, then sucks it up
again to be reused for one or more additional wash-water fills.
Sediment from the first wash settles out in the sink or tub. The
washer's intake hose is designed to leave about half an inch of
water, so the sediment is not pumped b~ck. That arrangement
saves about 17 gallons of water and about half the detergent for

REpAIR HISTORY

Washing machines from KitchenAid, Whirlpool, and Hotpoint
have had a more reliable record than other brands, according to a
1994 Consumer Reports reader survey. Machines from WhiteWestinghouse, Frigidaire, and Magic Chef have been the most
trouble-prone.
The older the washer, of course, the more likely it has ever
been repaired. Accordingly, age is taken into account when analyzing the repair data. Usage also affects a washer's reliability.
Among machines used for one to four loads a week, only 15 percent ever needed repair. Some 20 percent of the machines used
for five to seven loads a week have needed some repair. And 26
percent of the machines used for eight or more loads per week
have needed repair.

90

LAUNDRY

each reuse. About a gallon of fresh water is added to the next
load of laundry to compensate for what was left in the sink. The
more the wash water is reused, the cooler and the less effective
it becomes; it is up to the user to decide when to stop recycling.
Fresh detergent in each reuse, plus fresh-water rinses, keep cleaning performance up.
OTHER CHARACTERISTICS

Here are some aspects of performance other than capacity and
efficiency.
Unbalanced loads. Ski jackets, mattress pads, blankets, and other
bulky items strain a machine's suspension by making the tub oscillate as it spins. Consumers Union's testers gave each machine an
increasingly unbalanced load and watched to see if the machine
banged or "walked" across the floor. A few machines did quite
well. Others banged loudly even with a moderately unbalanced
load. Some machines have a switch that shuts the machine off if
the load goes out of balance. But such a switch can work all too
well, sometimes shutting off the machines with even a slightly unbalanced load.
To minimize rocking and vibration, the legs on a washer must
be set so that the machine is level yet kept as close to the floor as
possible. Many machines have self-leveling rear legs linked together, a design that makes the machine easier to level.
Sand disposal Most machines do quite well in removing fairly
large amounts of sand in the first wash. Even the worst should remove all the sand after two washes.
Linting. Laundering inevitably produces lint, but a well-designed
washing machine should filter it out. Most even have a self-cleaning lint filter that flushes lint away when spinning.
Noise. Noise becomes an important consideration if you live in an
apartment or a house where the washer is near the main living

CLOTIIES WASHERS

91

area. As a rule, machines are quietest in the Spin cycle, noisiest
when filling with water. Although the Fill cycle is short, it can be
downright boisterous.
Safety. Most machines on the market are designed to minimize
hazards. The majority have a brake that stops the spinning tub if
you lift the lid. Some lock the lid during Spin and make it impossible to lift the lid for about 45 seconds after the tub has stopped.
CONlROL

Most washers on the market let you choose a Regular cycle, a
Permanent Press cycle (with an extra cold-water spray or a deep
rinse to relax wrinkles), and a Knits/Delicates cycle (with slow agitation and spin). Some models with mechanical controls show
only Regular and Permanent Press cycles, but they allow you to
control agitation and spin speeds. Other machines automatically
set agitation and spin speeds when you choose a cycle.
Many machines offer a setting for a second rinse, but any of
these machines can be set by hand for an additional rinse and spin
at the end of a cycle. An extra rinse is useful if you're using extra
detergent to wash heavily soiled items or if you're sensitive to detergent and want to be sure it's removed from the clothes.
Otherwise, the extra rinse just wastes water.
Most machines can be set for at least the basic wash and rinse
temperatures: a hot wash/cold rinse for white or very soiled colorfast items; a warm wash/cold rinse for more lightly soiled or permanent press items; and a cold wash/cold rinse for delicates.
A few have additional water-temperature settings between hot
and warm and warm and cold. They provide more flexibility in
adapting choice to specific water temperatures. Other washing
machines offer warm wash/warm rinse and slow agitation, settings
that are preferable for washable woolens.
A few models have an electronic temperature control. It's sup-

92

LAUNDRY

posed to regulate the mix of hot and cold to produce warm water.
Other machines mix a preset proportion of cold and hot.
Manual controls differ in their ease of use. Large, easy-to-read
lettering, uncluttered areas and color, or other clear markers to
illustrate the different cycles are best. No dial has it all. But
some are straightforward and color-coded. Others have very large,
easy-to-read dials that may be better suited for visually impaired
persons.
An electronically controlled machine may seem formidable at
first, but most prove simple to use. With the typical electronic machine, you choose a cycle, then press Start. The electronics handle all the choices for water temperature, agitation, and the like.
You can use Up/Down buttons to change the preset water level,
the water temperature, the washing time, and so on. Some machines display prompts to show you which button needs to be
pressed next.
Electronically controlled .units usually command a premium
price. A retired independent repairman told Consumers Union that
electronic controls are more expensive' to repair than mechanical
ones. But the manufacturers Consumers Union contacted maintained that electronic controls in washing machines are inherently
more reliable than mechanical ones. Any problems that occur
show up immediately and can be fixed under warranty, say the
manufacturers.
RECOMMENDA710NS

Deluxe machines come with the added features and price tags that
typify top-of-the-line equipment. Less-expenSive machines should
get your clothes just as clean, but they may have a smaller tub or
more rudimentary controls, They may also lack such amenities as
a bleach or fabric-softener dispenser.

DETERGENTS

93

Models with conventional manual controls seem to offer better
value. The electronic machines perform no better overall, and they
sell for $100 to $300 more than their mechanical counterparts.
DETERGENTS
Detergent manufacturers try to attract buyers with specific laundry
problems. There are powders and liquids that ease pretreatment
of tough soils. Some detergents come with special ingredients
such as color-safe bleach, fabric softener, or stain-fighting enzymes. Some are free of perfumes and dyes. Practically all are
made without phosphates to avoid possible harm to waterways.
Several "green" brands suggest that they will give the user not only
a cleaner clean but a healthier planet.
There are only a few remaining regular-strength detergents.
Most now come in concentrated strengths. And now there are superconcentrated or "ultra" products, whose containers are as small
as a lunch box but can hold enough detergent for many loads.
The truth is that all detergents clean lightly soiled clothes. But
some are better than others at keeping loosened soil from settling
back on clothes, for stain removal, and in brightening. Powders,
as a class, outperform most liquids. Major national brands of powders and liquids perform better than store brands. Products that
contain bleach or "bleach alternative" tend to outperform those
that do not. Some mail-order and health-food store "green brands"
do not perform as well as some regular store brands. They also
may cost more.
STAIN REMOVAL

No laundry detergent will completely remove all common stains.
But most major national brands of powders-especially those with

94

LAUNDRY

bleach or bleach alternative-can remove many common stains
better than most liquids. Laundry detergents at best are only fair at
removing used motor-oil stains. However, results improve remarkably if you use certain detergent boosters before laundering.
BRIGHlENING

Most laundry detergents contain ingredients that absorb ultraviolet
light from the sun or from fluorescent fixtures and emit it as blue
light. Even laundry detergents that claim to be free of perfumes
and dyes can contain brighteners. Most powders produce a
brighter blue-white glow than most liquids.
COSTS

The cost per six-pound load of heavily soiled clothes laundered in
moderately hard warm water averages about 30 to 40 cents.
However, the full range of costs is rather wide for regular liquids,
from 23 to 52 cents. For major concentrated liquids the range is
from 16 to 69 cents per load. For super-concentrated powders the
cost is from 13 to 64 cents.
RECOMMENDATIONS

If your laundry rarely has stubborn stains, buy by price. You can
save the most money by forgetting brand loyalty: Clip coupons
and stock up on whatever satisfactory product is on sale.
If you regularly wash heavily stained clothes, choose a powder
rather than a liquid and a major brand rather than a store brand.
Select the lowest-price major brand rather than a higher-price one.
The differences in performance will be small.
DETERGENT INGREDIENTS

Here's a rundown of five key ingredients you might find on a
package of laundry detergent.

DETERGENTS

95

Sur!actants, or surface active agents, are dirt removers. They
emulsify, suspend, and disperse oil, grease, and dirt, allowing all
of that to be washed away. There are many such chemicals, and
detergents may contain more than one kind. Anionic surfactants,
which have a negative electrical charge, work best in warm, soft
water. They are very effective on oily stains and in removing clay.
Nonionic surfactants, which lack an electrical charge, are less sensitive to water hardness. They excel at removing oily soils. Many
detergents contain this type. Some powders and liquids contain
both anionic and non ionic surfactants. Cationic surfactants, which
carry a positive charge, are more common in fabric softeners.
Builders enhance the cleaning efficiency of surfactants by softening the water. Some also maintain a desirable level of alkalinity,
which boosts cleaning. Phosphates are builders. They have been
replaced by other builders such as zeolites. Some powders use
washing soda with extra ingredients to make up for the lack of
phosphoms. Liquids may contain other water-softening chemicals
such as sodium citrate.
Whitening agents, also known as fluorescent brighteners, give
laundry an added blue glow in sunlight and fluorescent light, making garments appear brighter than they otherwise would.
Enzymes help break down complex soils so they can be more
easily removed. Two common types of enzymes are protease and
amylase. A protease breaks down protein, as in egg or bloodstains.
An amylase digests carbohydrates, as in honey or maple symp.
All-fabnc bleach is an addition to some detergent powders. Allfabric bleaches, sodium percarbonate or sodium perborate tetrahydrate, are safe on most colored washable fabrics except those with
a care label warning "no bleach. "
DETERGENTS AND THE ENVIRONMENT

The washing machine or dishwasher completes its cycle; you pull

96

LAUNDRY

out the clean clothes or dishes; the wash water has drained
away-somewhere. After you've finished using a detergent product, you throwaway the empty carton, box, bottle, or can. It goes
into a garbage truck and is driven away-somewhere. But what
happens to that water and those containers? Here is a primer on
the environmental ramifications of cleaning.
Biodegradable? Many detergent products claim to be biodegradable or to contain biodegradable ingredients. The fact is that all
surfactants (the main cleaning agents) in today's cleaning products
are biodegradable and are quickly and thoroughly broken down
during wastewater treatment.
Some manufacturers promote their "natural ingredient" products as being better for the environment than those made with
synthetic (petroleum-derived) ingredients. They state that their respective vegetable-based surfactants are for people who care
about the environment, and that their products save petroleum, a
limited natural resource.
Petroleum-derived oils and vegetable-derived oils are used as
feed stocks for many detergent surfactants. Both types come from
"natural" sources. In each case, the oils are chemically processed
to make the surfactants. They are, therefore, all "synthetic."
Although there are environmental impacts associated with the
manufacture of either vegetable or petroleum-derived surfactants,
there is no inherent environmental advantage to using one surfactant source over the other. Minor ingredients such as optical
brighteners and fragrances may degrade less rapidly than other ingredients, but Consumers Union has seen no convincing evidence
that they cause any harm. Overall, detergents are pretty benign to
the environment. Without conducting a complex and exceedingly
difficult life-cycle analysis, it is not possible to compare overall environmental costs of different detergent products. Accordingly, any

DETERGENTS

97

claimed advantages of the "green" brands should be taken with a
grain of salt and weighed against product performance and cost.
Phosphates. Some liquid detergent products' labels say they are
phosphate-free; others don't. But phosphates aren't soluble or stable enough to be used in liquid detergents. Accordingly, all are
phosphate-free.
Phosphated detergents, blamed for contributing to the growth
of algae in waterways, have been banned in many regions of the
country. Now, most national powder laundry detergent products
are also phosphate-free. Most detergents formulated for use in
dishwashers-powder and gel--contain phosphates.
Packaging. A few years ago, plastic containers seemed an environmental evil; the package of choice was made of paper or cardboard. Paper is "biodegradable," the thinking went, and eventually
returns to the soil. But when it's in a landfill devoid of light and
air, paper has staying power. In .1989, garbage archaeologists unearthed readable newspapers from 1942. It's clear that once trash
(or at least nontoxic trash) lands in a landfill, its composition matters less than its volume.
As landfills, the final resting place for most of America's
garbage, fill up and close down, packaging may become a more
important reason for selecting or rejecting a product. Some
laundry packages lining store shelves contain recycled materials.
Cardboard boxes always have; many plastic bottles do now, too.
Recycling differs from community to community. Although plastic bottles and paperboard boxes may be labeled recyclable, they
aren't always recycled. Most recycling programs take high-density
polyethylene bottles. Paperboard cartons, although theoretically
recyclable, fall into a category of "mixed paper," which is rarely included in curbside recycling programs because there's not much
of a market for it.

98

LAUNDRY

Refills for superconcentrated laundry detergents often come in
containers that make use of less material than their original,
reusable packaging. The same is essentially true iIi the case
of most liquid laundry detergents. Differences in the amount of
waste are a function of the detergents' cleaning ability rather than
the size of their packages. A concentrated detergent that cleans
20 washer loads with three pounds of powder leaves behind
far less packaging than a six-pound package that cleans the
same number of loads. Many ultraconcentrated detergents excel
in this regard.
DRY CLEANING

Dry cleaning launders clothes in a solvent, often with detergent
and sometimes a little water. It is recommended for materials such
as wool, which might shrink and suffer other damage if laundered
with conventional detergent and water. Currently, the great majority of dry-cleaning establishments use the solvent perchloroethylene for general dry cleaning. For spot removal, the chbice of
solvent depends on the type of spot and the fabric.
Use of perchloroethylene raises certain environmental and
human health concerns. The solvent is present in low levels in the
atmosphere in cities. It is released slowly from fabrics , so bringing
home and wearing dry-cleaned clothes exposes the consumer to
perchloroethylene.
Perchloroethylene is classed as a possible human carcinogen by
the u.s. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and is being reclassified by the International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC) as a likely human carcinogen. Over time, even low doses
of perchloroethylene may increase risk of cancer. People exposed
to moderate doses of perchloroethylene for a long time have ex-

DRY CLEANING

99

perienced kidney damage and altered liver function, as well as
altered neurological function.
The best way for most people to minimize exposure to perchloroethylene is to minimize the amount of dry cleaning they do.
Don't dry clean a garment that doesn't need it. A suit that's wrinkled or baggy may need only to be pressed. If you brush a suit
after each wearing, it can go a long time between cleanings, barring a stain. With clothes other than suits and sports jackets, try
hand washing and ironing rather than dry cleaning. Many fabrics,
including silk and rayon, usually do fine in detergent and water, if
handled with care.
Don't store newly dry cleaned clothes in a child's room. Since
children are smaller than adults, they're more sensitive to toxins.
If possible, wait a week or more to let the solvent dissipate before using newly dry cleaned items. A dry-cleaning establishment
should remove as much cleaning agent as possible before delivering a garment to you. If you detect a residual chemical odor, return it to the store for further processing or look for another shop.
Because of the environmental and health problems from drycleaning solvents, alternative "multiprocess wet cleaning" facilities
are becoming franchised in several cities. In this aqueous cleaning
process, the cleaner selects among various cleaning techniques
(including steam cleaning, spot remOVing, hand washing, gentle
machine washing, tumble drying, and vacuuming) to ensure that
garments made of different fabrics are cleaned-hopefully-without damage. In 1993 the EPA published a report on a study deSigned to compare multiprocess wet cleaning with dry cleaning.
Although there isn't enough data to determine if the method can
be used to clean all materials safely, the EPA concluded that it is
a viable option to reduce the usage of dry-cleaning solvents. If
there is an outlet near you, consider trying it.

100 LAUNDRY

FABRIC SOFTENERS
Detergents can wash fibers so thoroughly that they leave clothes
feeling scratchy; dryers can cause clothes to cling to each other because of buildup of static charge. (This is especially true with synthetic fabrics.)
Fabric softeners are waxy materials that are related to soap.
They work by coating your laundry with waxy lubricants and
humectant chemicals. The lubricants let fibers slide past each
other, reducing wrinkling. They also separate a napped fabric's
fibers and stand them on end, which makes a towel, for instance,
feel fluffy . The humectants help the fabric retain moisture to dissipate the static charges that would otherwise cause clothes to
cling and sparks to fly when you pull them apart. Many people
use a fabric softener to cut static cling caused by the dryer's tumbling. The friction-reducing chemicals in softeners prevent a static
charge from accumulating.
There are three basic types of fabric softeners. Rinse liquids are
added to the wash during the rinse cycle; many washing machines automatically add them from a dispenser atop the agitator. Dryer sheets
are impregnated with softener. When you put a sheet into the dryer
along with the laundry, contact and heat release the softener.
Detergents with fabric softeners are added at the start of the wash cycle.
For best results, add rinse liquids at the beginning of the final
rinse (after a wash with a regular laundry detergent that does not
contain softener). Place dryer sheets on top of the wet laundry to
help prevent spotting.
The most effective softeners are the rinse liquids, but the least
effective rinse liquids perform much more poorly than the best.
Major brands and store brands of dryer sheets soften to roughly
the same degree; about as effectively as average-performing rinse
liquids. Detergents that contain softeners are mediocre at softening as well as cleaning.

HAND-LAUNDRY DETERGENTS

101

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

Brightening. The waxy coating left by fabric softeners may eventually make clothes look dingy. If whiter whites and brighter
brights are important to you, use a high-performing laundry
detergent with high brightening ability before you add a fabric
softener.
Fragrance. Makers of laundry detergents include fragrances
partly because some consumers like them and partly to hide the
smell of other chemical ingredients. No matter how potent it
seems in the package, the fragrance is muted considerably by the
time the wash is done. If you like a fabric softener for its other
qualities but dislike the smell, let your clothes air out for a while
before you put them away. Some people can't tolerate any fragrance, whether for aesthetic or medical reasons. Fabric softeners
and laundry detergents that are perfume-free are available.
PRICING

The cost per use of rinse liquids tends to be higher than that of
dryer sheets. Detergents that contain fabric softeners are not
money-saving products; they neither clean nor soften as well as
single-purpose products. You can save money by buying whatever
is on sale or using cents-off coupons.
HAND-LAUNDRY DETERGENTS

Your best guide on how to clean a fabric is the care label, which
by law must be sewn into all articles of clothing. If the .label says
a garment must be dry-cleaned, follow that advice, or you will
have no recourse with the manufacturer or retailer should something go wrong. If the label permits hand washing, you have to
decide how to wash it.
On the supermarket shelves, next to the regular laundry deter-

102

LAUNDRY

gents, you may find several products that make special claims for
laundering fine washables of such fabrics as linen, wool, cotton,
and silk. Many hand dishwashing liquids also say they can be used
to launder fine washables.
WASHING WITH DETERGENT

Detergents are a big improvement over old-fashioned soap. In
hard water, soaps leave behind a gray scum if you don't rinse well.
Not so with detergents; they have ingredients to lift off soil and
keep it suspended in the wash water. Detergents generally include
other ingredients to help remove grease and other soils. Some
have optical brighteners to make whites look whiter and enzymes
to help attack stains.
EFFECTIVENESS

For safe and effective hand laundering of fine washables, try very
gentle hand washing at 70°F, a temperature warm enough to be
comfortable to hands but cool enough to prevent shrinkage. Keep
wash and rinse times to a few minutes each. The less time delicate
fabrics are left soaking, the better.
The optical brighteners found in some hand-laundering products adhere to fabric and give off a bluish color in sunlight or
under fluorescent lights, which makes white cloth appear whiter
than it really is. Brighteners tend to work best on cotton.
HANDLE WITH CARE

Heat causes shrinkage, which is why fine fabrics are typically labeled for cold or cool wash, with no drying in the dryer. Silk crepe
tends to pucker and requires ironing after washing. Rayon washes
poorly; it wrinkles badly unless pressed while quite damp. Wool
crepe, its weave tighter in one direction, can lose shape. If, before

HAND-LAUNDRY DETERGENTS

103

washing, a fabric has more "give" in one direction as you gently
stretch it, you may have shrinkage problems.
When you hand-wash garments, roll them between towels and
let them dry flat, away from heat and sunlight; do not wring them.
It's prudent not to launder wool or silk in any enzyme-containing
detergent unless the product's label says it's safe for them.
RECOMMENDATIONS

There is no reason to buy one of the specialized brands of detergents. Use a hand dishwashing liquid. All it lacks is the optical
brightener that regular detergents and most hand-wash products
contain to give . whites extra dazzle. At about a penny a wash,
hand dishwashing liquids are bargains. Even if you have stains to
clean, you may have some luck with dishwashing liquid, depending on the fiber and type of stain.

Metal
Maintenance
METAL POLISHES
Although many metal polishes make broad claims, no one product is likely to be labeled for use on all of the following: silver,
brass, copper, stainless steel, aluminum, and chrome.
COPPER AND BRASS

Copper and brass can be cleaned with a commercial cleaner available in your supermarket. Some of these products must be washed
off thoroughly, because they can stain or etch metals if left in contact with them. Others, however, may be wiped or rubbed off. It
is a good idea, therefore, to restrict your choice to a wipe-off polish for objects that can't be readily rinsed or submersed.
Some wipe-off brands may produce a better shine. Wash-off products, however, require less elbow grease to remove tarnish than do
polishes of the Wipe-off variety-a difference that you might consider important if you have to clean a heavily tarnished surface.
105

106

METAL MAINTENANCE

For objects that may be only thinly coated with brass or copper,
you should use the mildest cleaning method possible. This means
a cloth with hand dishwashing liquid and water.
Before any polish can work, the metal surface must be free of
any lacquer. Of course, it mayor may not have a lacquer. If it
does, clean it but don't attempt to polish it.
COPPER-Bo7TOMED COOKWARE

Wash-off polishes are particularly well suited to cookware, which
can be easily washed and doesn't require a high gloss. These
products should be able to remove light tarnish with little or no
rubbing and heavy tarnish with less effort than a wipe-off material. Even with the most efficient product, you still must use considerable elbow grease to clean a heavily blackened pan bottom,
and still the metal polish may not work. Steel wool will do the job
more easily than polish but may leave the copper surface
scratched and its mirrorlike finish diminished. If your pans are in
bad shape but you are display conscious, you might first scour off
the worst of the dirt with very fine steel wool and then finish the
job with a wipe-off polish. This will avoid scratch marks and result in a good gloss.
SAFETY

Polishes, like other household chemicals, should be kept out of
the reach of children. Some products carry special warnings.
How TO POLISH STAINLESS STEEL, ALUMINUM, AND CHROME

Stainless steel may stain with heat; aluminum becomes discolored
with use, and its polished surface may dull; chrome doesn't tarnish, but it can become dirty and splotched.
Stainless steeL Ordinary cleaning in the sink will suffice for
stainless-steel cookware except for an occasional stain from heat.

SILVER CARE

107

To remove heat stains from the matte finish inside of a saucepan
or fry pan, a commercial stainless steel cleaner can do a competent job, at least as good as and maybe better than soapy steel
wool. If the pan's polished exterior is also stained, use a polishing
product cautiously. Work as quickly as possible to avoid leaving
chemicals in contact with the metal for any length of time, and be
sure to rinse thoroughly.
Aluminum. You shouldn't expect to be able to restore a polished
aluminum finish to its original glossiness. Soapy steel wool will
probably restore some of the luster. Rubbing the metal in a straight
back-and-forth motion, rather than in circles, helps to maintain a
uniform appearance.
Chrome. The chrome plating on a metal product may be so thin
that it is best not to use any abrasive polish on it at all. The mildest
cleaning method possible should be used for chrome-plated appliances and utensils.
ClEANING OrnER COOKWARE TYPES

Cast iron. Wash cast-iron cookware in hot water and hand dishwashing liquid, but do not scour. Rinse and dry the cookware immediately after cleaning to avoid rusting. If manufacturer's
instructions recommend oiling, do so after cleaning.
Enameled cookware. Clean enameled cookware in warm sudsy
water. Soak pots to loosen burned-on foods and to remove stubborn stains. If necessary, use a nonabrasive cleanser and a nonabrasive scrubbing pad. Cookware that has a nonstick finish can
be cleaned in the dishwasher.
SILVER CARE

One type of silver-care product (three-way) removes tarnish, polishes, and treats silver with chemicals that retard further tarnish-

108

METAL MAINTENANCE

ing. Another variety (two-way) cleans and polishes but doesn't
claim to retard tarnishing. Both types of products include a mild
abrasive. You rub on the polish, wipe it off, and then buff the finish to the shine you want.
There are also one-way products that come in liquid form and
are used for cleaning only. They don't require tedious rubbing to
remove tarnish. You just dip the silver in them or spread them
onto silver surfaces. Acidic dip cleaners, as a class, have some inherent hazards: Wear plastic or rubber gloves to protect your
hands while cleaning, because contact with the cleaner may irritate skin. Be careful not to get any cleaner in your eyes. Since excessive inhalation of their sulfide fumes may be disagreeable and
may cause headaches, these cleaners should be used only where
there is good ventilation. Rinse silver thoroughly after cleaning
with acidic dip products.
USING JEWELER'S ROUGE

Cleaning and polishing heavily tarnished silver with a stick of jeweler's rouge entails coating a piece of flannel with rouge, rubbing
silver surfaces with the flannel until they are tarnish-free, then
buffing the silver with a piece of clean flannel. The result will be
silver just about as clean and bright as you can get with the best
silver polish. This method has two drawbacks: You have to rub a
lot more, and the process is messy, producing quantities of red
particles that can smudge clothes and furnishings and can accumulate in the details, requiring scrubbing with a soft brush to remove. Rouge, however, is much cheaper than regular polish, and
the cloths you use for cleaning are reusable until they start to
come apart. You can get rouge from hobby shops or firms that
supply professional jewelers. Look in the Yellow Pages under
"Jewelers' Supplies" and "Craft Supplies."

SILVER CARE

109

SPECIAL PROBlEMS

Antiquefinishes. Dark-looking silver with an antique or oxidized
finish is often deeply patterned. Silver polish is almost certain to
remove some of the finish. Dip cleansers· damage antique finishes,
too, even when you carefully wipe the liquids onto the silver.
Satin finishes. Dips remove tarnish from satin, or low-luster, finishes without making them shinier (to some degree).
Waining. If you accidentally allow drops of polish to fall on silver
pieces, dip cleaners may leave pale stains. You have to repolish to
remove the stains. Many silver table knives are made with stainless steel blades, and-just as the label warns-drops from dip
cleaners can permanently spot or even pit stainless steel if allowed
to dry on the surface. To avoid damage, rinse such knives
promptly after using a dip cleaner on their silver handles.
RECOMMENDA710NS

As a class, three-way products may be higher priced than other
products. Nonetheless, a good three-way product is preferred. It
also does the job of polishing-and does it well. What's more, because of its tarnish retardance, you won't have to clean the silver
again quite as soon as you would with other polishes. Dip cleaners work fast, but you may still need to Use a polish,afterward, and
polishing, after all, is like cleaning all over again.

Miscellaneous
Am

CLEANERS

A house can harbor a wide variety of pollutants: radon gas, cigarette smoke, cooking fumes; gases and smoke from furnaces and
gas ranges; solvents from dry-cleaned clothing; and chemicals
from paints, household cleaners, bug sprays, and the like. In the
average American house, outdoor air replaces indoor air at the
rate of only about one air change an hour. A "tight" house, with
well-sealed windows and doors, may have an air exchange only
once every four or five hours.
Obviously, you can ventilate the house by opening the windows, especially when cooking or painting. But you wouldn't
want to do that when the weather is very hot or cold. Obviously,
too, the more pollutants and irritants you can eliminate or control,
the better. You can keep dust mites at bay, for example, if you
wash bedding in hot water. And a kit~hen exhaust fan can control
cooking odors and smoke.
Using an appliance to clear the air can be less effective, and
much more expensive, than opening a window. Most air cleaners
are designed to remove smoke and dust but not gases, tobacco

111

112 MISCELLANEOUS

odors, or viruses and bacteria. And an air cleaner can never completely eliminate pollution; new contaminants enter the house
constantly.
A typical tabletop air cleaner can move only small amounts of
air each minute; it is suitable for a small room or part of a large
room. Bigger models are designed to move several hundred cubic
feet of air a minute; they are meant for larger rooms.

How AIR CLEANERS OPERATE
Smoke particles, microbes, and many other solid contaminants are
far smaller than the hair and dust you· see floating in the air, narrower than the 10-micron threshold of visibility (a micron is about
one twenty-five-thousandth of an inch). The gas molecules from
smoke are many times smaller still. To remove such small particles, air cleaners typically use filters, electrical attraction, or ozone.
Here are the basics of how the principal types work.
Filters. The finer a filter's sieve, the smaller the particles it traps.
"High-efficiency particulate arresting" filters (HEPA, for short)
snare at least 99.97 percent of particles larger than 0.3 micron.
These filters were originally developed to trap radioactive dust in
atomic plants. A variant, the pleated filter, traps at least 95 percent
of the same particles. By comparison, a room air conditioner's
foam filter traps particles only 10 microns or larger, and no more
than 30 percent of them at that. But even the best HEPA filter can't
catch something as small as a gas molecule. Activated carbon or
charcoal filters, found on many HEPA- or pleated-filter air cleaners, are needed for that task.
Electrical attraction. There are three main types. In an. electrostatic precipitating cleaner, a high-voltage wire charges particles
drawn in by a fan, which are then attracted to a precipitatit;lg cell
carrying the opposite electrical charge. An "electret" filter uses

AIR CLEANERS

113

fibers with a static charge to trap particles. A negative-ion generator uses fine, electrically charged needles or wires to ionize particles, which collect in a filtet: or, more typically, on your walls and
furnishings. None of the electrical-attraction cleaners remove gas
molecules, which tend to diffuse back into the air.
Ozonation. An ozone generator uses a high-voltage electric
charge to convert oxygen in the air to ozone, a pungent, powerful oxidant. At sufficiently high concentrations, ozone attacks and
destroys gas molecules and microorganisms. Ozone has no effect
on dust and other particulates, however. And ozone generators
sold for home use can actually foul the air.
There is no universally accepted performance standard for comparing air cleaners. The closest thing to one is the clean air delivery rate (CADR), which expresses the number of cubic feet of
clean air a unit delivers each minute. The CADR, developed and
certified by the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers, is
used by some air-cleaner manufacturers on their products.
For rooms of various sizes, the CADR is based on both the percentage of particles removed and how quickly they are removed.
Tests performed to the appliance association's specifications provide CADR numbers for dust, smoke, and pollen ..
Consumers Union believes that CADR numbers alone don't provide a complete picture of an air cleaner's effectiveness. It's also
necessary to know the unit's total air-flow rate to properly assess
efficiency. Two cleaners may have the same CADR, but the one
with the lower total air flow will be the more efficient.
Air flow. Room units move more air than tabletop models do. In
Consumers Union's tests, air flows were 10 percent lower than
what manufacturers claimed.
odoh. A telltale odor will linger long after you clear a room of
tobacco smoke. That's because most .air cleaners won't capture

114

MISCELLANEOUS

gases from the smoke, which stick to walls; furniture, and clothing, and which seep back into the air over time. Even the best air
cleaners remove smoke particles far more effectively than they do
smoke odors. It would take cleaners at least 10 times longer to remove odors than to remove smoke particles.
Noise. Few models are objectionably loud at ,their lowest fan
speed, but many can be annoying at their highest speed. The lowest setting is generally preferable for continuous use. Because an
air cleaner is often used in a bedroom at night, it is a good idea
to listen to the machine you are planning to buy. If you can't try
it in a quiet location in the store, be sure the air cleaner is returnable if it turns out to be too noisy at home.
MAiNJENANCE AND OPERATING COSTS

A few air cleaners consume a minimal amount of electricity over
the course of a year-less than $20 at the national average electric
rate. Energy costs range more typically from about $20 to $40.
The cost of replacement filters can be quite high, however, particularly for units using a HEPAfilter. Based on the manufacturers'
recommended filter replacement intervals, HEPA filters may cost
$50 to $140; other types of filters, $20 to $80 a year.
Most air cleaners require little maintenance beyond filter
changes and cleanings. If you choose an electrostatic precipitator,
you'll need to wash its electronic cell every few months.
RECOMMENDATIONS

Do what you can to minimize or eliminate sources of air pollution.
You may be able to improve the air quality inside your house
without spending hundreds of dollars on an air cleaner. Just opening a few windows may do the job. Even in winter, cracking open
a window a couple of inches won't raise your heating bill by more

AIR CLEANERS

115

than a few pennies an hour. In addition, a kitchen exhaust fan
should effectively dispose of smoke and fumes from cooking.
But if you can't open a window-because the outside air is polluted or the temperature outside is bitter cold--or if you need to
ventilate a windowless space, an air cleaner may be the only way
to reduce smoke and airborne dust.
DEAliNG WITH All.ERGY

Simply setting up an air cleaner in the middle of the room will not
reduce or prevent asthmatic attacks or offer relief from allergic and
respiratory problems, according to Harold S. Nelson, M.D., of the
National Jewish Center in Denver, who chaired a committee organized by the American Academy of Allergy and Immunology to
study allergens in indoor air and air-cleaning devices.
"Most household dust is inert," he told Consumers Union.
"Removing it from the air with [an air cleaner) won't help much.
As for pollen, an air conditioner may be sufficient."
Dr. Nelson blames the fecal pellets of house dust mites (microscopic creatures that feed on human skin cells that have been
sloughed off) for many allergic reactions. The pellets are too Earge
to remain airborne for long; they settle within minutes,so an air
cleaner is rather ineffective against them.
The problem is that the mites thrive in mattresses, pillows, and
blankets. An allergy sufferer buries his or her face in the bedding,
breathes in the pellets, and suffers an allergic reaction. The best
relief comes from separating the patient from the allergen. The pillows and mattress should be sealed in special allergen-proof casings, available from surgical supply houses. Blankets and sheets
should be washed often. For the same reason, allergy sufferers
should avoid lying on an upholstered couch.
Some manufacturers promote humidifiers as beneficial for aller-

116

MISCELLANEOUS

gies. Dr. Nelson believes a humidifier can do more harm than
good because house dust ' mites proliferate in humid conditions.
He advises keeping indoor humidity relatively low, at about 20 to
30 percent. If you use a humidifier, clean it frequently and in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
Animal dander is lighter than most dust and tends to remain airborne longer, creating a serious problem for allergy sufferers. If
you have a pet, at least keep the bedroom off limits. Here, an air
cleaner 'might help, since the airborne particles of animal dander
can be collected by these machines.
OZONE GENERATORS

Ozone can purify ,drinking water, disinfect mildewed boats, and
deodorize fire-ravaged buildings. But ozone is also a toxic gas, a
component of smog, with no known beneficial health effects.
The u.s. Occupational Safety and Health Administration limits
ozone exposure in industrial settings to 100 parts per billion Cppb)
over an eight-hour day, six days per week. At that level, ozone irritates the eyes, makes the throat feel dry, and stresses the lungs.
The U.S. Food and IDrug Administration has set a limit of 50 ppb
for the ozone from electronic air cleaners. That's a sensible limit
for the home.
Given those facts, an ozone-generating air cleaner would seem
a contradiction in terms. To date, Consumers Union has not found
a unit that allows users to measure ozone output or to control
ozone levels in a meaningful way. Some promotional materials say
you can tell if ozone levels are too high when the distinctive odor
becomes apparent But research has shown that odor isn't a reliable yardstick.
When Consumers Union tested ozone generators under a variety of conditions, they almost always produced ozone levels well
above the FDA's limit of 50 ppb. Although ozone generators have

AIR CLEANERS

117

limited value in unoccupied spaces, it's highly questionable
whether they belong where people breathe.
WHOlE-HOUSE AIR CIEANERS

There are air cleaners designed to fit the ductwork for central heating or air-conditioning. The simplest type is a filter that replaces
the system's existing one. It should be possible for you to install
and replace them yourself.
More complex-and more expensive-are electrostatic precipitators, which should be installed by a contractor. You can buy
these filters through heating and air-conditioning dealers, or at
home centers. It can cost as much as $300 to have a professional
install one of the electrostatic precipitators.
In tests that mimicked air flow through air ducts, in-duct electrostatic precipitators removed dust and smoke particles within a
room about as effectively as the better room-sized portable cleaners. A disposable electret filter was only a notch less effective. A
self-charging electrostatic filter was in the same league as a small
tabletop air cleaner.
Any of these in-duct air cleaners may affect the overall performance of the heating and cooling system. The precipitators have
no fan of their own, relying on the furnace or air conditioner to
move air through the system. So when the thermostat shuts the
system down, it will also shut down the air cleaner unless the system has a switch to keep the fan going continuously. In addition,
the filters will slow air flow through the ducts. That may make the
system run longer to heat or cool, increasing your energy bill.
If you have air-quality problems throughout the house that can't
be controlled in any other way-and if ductwork is already in
place-then the electrostatic precipitators could be useful. But if
you just need to clean the air in a couple of rooms, a portable air
cleaner would be a better choice.

118

MISCELLANEOUS

AUTO POLISHES
One of the attractions of a new car is its showroom shine. Many
newer models have an additional clear coating designed to add
even more luster and durability to the finish. But eventually sunlight, water, air pollution, and other contaminants can age and
erode the paint until the gloss fades, and the finish is no longer
able to shed contaminants (e.g., water, dirt, etc.). At this point,
auto polish can make a dramatic improvement.
You'll find auto polish in liquid, paste, and a few spray versions.
The products are interchangeably labeled wax, polish, or sealant
by their makers. The one-step applications contain abrasives or
solvents to remove stubborn stains or oxidation from a car's finish
and waxes or silicones that can fill tiny crack~ and renew the water
repellency of the finish.
EFFECTIVENESS

On car surfaces that are weathered, some polishes will shine better than others. Yet even the better ones won't increase the gloss
of a new car. Some can make new paint look worse by leaving
slight scratches or haze.
A major part of the sales appeal of auto polishes is the protection they're supposed to provide against the elements. But a polish can't protect anything once it has worn away. People who
polish their cars may not do it often enough with most polishes.
If you want to see whether a polish is holding up, look at what
happens to water on the car's surface. :rhe beads of water that
form on a protected surface are relatively small and rounded, and
sit high on the surface. As the polish wears away, the beads spread
and flatten. Eventually, when the polish is completely gone, water
doesn't bead at all; it lies in a sheet on the surface.
Liquids are somewhat easier to apply and spread better than
pastes, but all products should goon easily. Spray-on products are

AUTO POLISHES

119

especially easy to apply. But be careful not to get the spray-or
any polish, for that matter-on vinyl surfaces or on the windshield. The polish may affect the appearance of the vinyl. (Be sure
to shake a liquid or spray container before you begin; some of the
ingredients may have settled to the bottom.)
Instructions on the labels of most nonspray polishes call for
spreading them on with an applicator (which is provided with
some products), letting them dry to a haze, and buffing with a dry,
soft cotton cloth. Buffing is likely to ·be fairly easy with most. But
a few products dry into a rather stiff coating that needs more effort to buff. You should never polish a,car in direct sunlight when
the surface is hot to the touch. The paint can soften and be susceptible to scratching.
ABRASIVENESS

The paint, not the polish, protects a car's metal from rust. So it
makes sense to polish away no 'more paint than is necessary to restore a smooth finish. If you're using a polish for the first time on
your car, test it on an inconspicuous part of the car. It should remove any oxidation or contaminants but shouldn't.1eave a haze or
scratches. On older cars that do not have a clear top coat, polish
should not remove much of the color.
A fine abrasive is useful for removing stubborn stains or oxidation. For an extremely weathered finish, however, even the most
abrasive polishes may not be adequate. Special, highly abrasive
polishing or rubbing compounds are available for such challeng~
ing jobs. They are usually found right next to the auto polishes in
the store. But do not rub too long or too hard with them, or you
may rub right through the paint to the primer.
RECOMMENDATIONS

Whichever polish you use, be sure to wash the car thoroughly be-

120

MISCELLANEOUS

forehand. Most road dirt is a good deal harder than a car's finish.
If you polish a dirty car, you'll only grind the dirt into the paint,
scratching the finish as you rub.
You may not need to polish a new car, but you should wash it
often. Bird and tree droppings, salt, tar, and even plain dirt can
eventually mar the finish. Frequent washing is especially important
in the summer, when high temperatures increase the damaging effects of contaminants.
PAINT REMOVAL

When you have to deal with paint that's in really poor condition,
you may have to go beyond just stripping away the flaking
and peeling paint. If you don't, the surface-whether that offurniture, walls, or the side of a house-may continue to deteriorate.
You'd probably have far better results if you stripped off all the
old paint.
Before you remove any paint, find out if it contains any lead.
Lead paint-or more precisely, lead-containing dust from leaded
paint in the .home-is a . major cause of childhood lead poisoning. Many children have accidentally been poisoned when the
process of remodeling in an older home spread lead·dust. If your
home or apartment building was built more than 20 years ago, it
may contain leaded paint. If it is more than 50 years old, it is
almost certain that there is some lead paint. Intact lead paint,
covered with layers of unleaded paint, is essentially harmless.
But improper removal that turns the lead loose can create a
severe hazard.
If you do have lead paint to remove, dust control is critical. You
should, therefore, choose a chemical stripper. If you are sure the
paint you need to strip is lead-free, choose any of the three basic

PAlNT REMOVAL

121

methods--chemical. mechanical, or heat-based on each method's pros and cons. Most do-it-yourselfers use chemicals and/ or
heat guns for all kinds of interior woodwork: furniture, doors,
moldings, and the like.
Chemical strippers soften and dislodge the old finish so you can
scrape it off. They are sold as liquids, gels, or pastes; some are
more toxic than others.
Heat is delivered via heat guns. Some people use a propane
torch, but the open flame can char wood or even start a fire. By
blowing air that can reach temperatures greater than 800oF, these
devices-which resemble a blow-dryer--cause paint to blister and
bubble; then you scrape.
'
Mechanical stripping relies on such tools as scrapers and sandpaper, power sanders, and gadgets that attach · to drills. Because
they can scratch, these tools shouldn't be used on smooth or delicate surfaces.
Rather than try to strip the paint yourself, you can farm out the
work to professionals. A pro is likely to do a more thorough job,
and the price is usually reasonable.
TESTING FOR LEAD PAINT

Consider hiring a trained person to do a lead hazard ~ssessment.
This involves testing representative paint surfaces with a portable
X-ray fluorescence device that produces instant results and can
even find lead paint buried· under layer~ of unleaded paint. It also
includes taking samples of dirt from the floors and window .sills to
be analyzed in a laboratory. An assessment should cost about $300
for an average-size house.
Another way to tell whether your home has lead paint is to use
one of the do-it-yourself or mail-in kits available for that purpose.
With the do-it-yourself kits, you cut, scrape, or sand a small patch

122

MISCELLANEOUS

to expose layers of paint. Then you use a chemical reagent-either rhodizonate or sodium sulfide-that changes color if the paint
contains lead. With rhodizonate kits, the warning color-pink-is
easy to see unless the paint itself is red or pink. Sodium sulfide
kits indicate lead with a gray to black color, so it is hard to ·see a
positive reaction on dark paint. These kits c'learly indicate high
levels of lead, but some may not detect levels slightly above the
0.06 percent legal limit in paint. Although this percentage is much
lower than the levels in most old paint, the levels these kits. can
miss are still too high for safety, especially for households with
children. Two kits-Acc-U-Test ($7) and Tbe Lead Detective
($30)-were found to be sensitive down to 0.05 percent. They're
good on light-colored paints.
Mail-in kits (costing about $20) can detect lead levels down to
0.05 percent. They include a plastic bag, plastic gloves, and a
form to fill out and return with the paint sample. The cost includes
analysis of one sample by a government-certified lab. Results are
likely to be much more accurate than those obtained from home
kits . . Mail-in kits also say how much lead is present, not just
whether it is there or not. Consumers Union found the Clean
Water Lead in Paint Kit to provide a rapid-about 2 weeks-turnaround.
CHEMICAL PAINT REMOVERS

If you have lead paint to remove, choose a chemical stripper.
Some chemical paint removers are made with volatile solventsmethanol (wood alcohol), toluene, and acetone. Although they're
cheaper and faster than some less toxic types, they leave a waxy
film that you may need to remove with mineral spirits. But this is
the least of their problems. Most are highly flammable, and their
vapors can cause headaches and, after continued and prolonged
exposure, nerve damage.

PAINT REMOVAL

123

In the world of solvent strippers; those made with methylene
chloride stand alone. A mainstay of paint-removal products for
years, methylene chloride can soften and dislodge a variety of
tough finishes, including polyurethanes and epoxies, and isn't
flammable. But exposure to its fumes can lead to kidney disease,
an irregular heartbeat, even heart attack. The solvent is considered
a possible human carcinogen, based on persuasive animal studies.
Any solvent-based paint remover, whether it uses volatile solvents or methylene chloride, can be dangerous to use indoors,
even with a window open. Protective garb is essential-neoprene
gloves (dishwashiQg gloves will dissolve), goggles, and a respirator to keep you from inhaling fumes.

LEss HAZARDOUS

CHEMICAlS

The past few years have seen the introduction of chemical strippers that pose fewer risks than the solvent products. Almost odorfree as well as safer to breathe, they are less likely to irritate skin.
Cleanup is easier, too. Once the softened paint has been scraped,
light scrubbing with ·a .wet sponge or rag will clear away any remaining residue.
The safer products, however; are very slow to show results. A
solvent stripper might remove several coats of paint in two or
three hours. A nonsolvent stripper would have to sit from six
hours to overnight. To make matters worse, some nonsolvent
varieties dry out, which means you have to brush additional remover Over the slightly moist paint. Look for products that come
with plastic-coated paper that's applied over the substance to keep
it moist.
HEAT GUNS

If you know you have lead paint to strip, never use a heat gun.
They can increase your exposure to lead by whipping paint dust

124

MISCELLANEOUS

into the air, where you can inhale it. When the dust settles, it can
still be hazardous to young children.
Using a heat gun is intense work, but it's faster than any chemical method. Unlike chemicals, heat guns rarely have to go over
the same area twice. Once . the hot paint separates from the underlying surface, you can peel it off easily.
After the initial expense, heat guns are cheap to use. But they
do have limitations. They're frustrating to use when the paint film
is very thin (they work best when bubbling up several layers);
they won't remove varnish or other clear coatings; ' and they're ineffective on painted metal. (Metal conducts heat too rapidly.)
Heat guns also have hazards. The expelled-air temperature may
be as high as 87S0F-high enough to cause a severe burn or even
start a fire. Also, it's easy to ignore where you're pointing the gun
as you dig out a persistent bit of paint. Always keep a wet rag and
a bucket of water handy.
Even if you're never blasted by the gun's hot air, you can get
burned by touching the metal nozzle. This is a serious concern,
especially if you put down the gun near a child or curious pet. It
is essential to look for models that have a fan that runs at a Low
or Cold setting to hasten cooling.
PROFESSIONAL STRIPPING

Professional paint removers have one big advantage over do-ityourselfers: they use a tank. By immersing items that need paint
removed in a cavernous vat of potent chemicals', professionals can
get the last traces of paint out of nooks and crannies.
"Dip" stripping systems differ significantly. Some rely on corrosive lye; others on solvents. When you contact a professional paint
remover, it's a good idea to ask which method of paint removal
will be used.

PAINT REMOVAL

125

A remover who uses lye will dunk the painted object in a lye
and water solution. The softened paint is scraped off, and the item
is neutralized and rinsed with water. It's an inexpensive and effective treatment-too effective, in fact. Lye not only dissolves
paint; it can also stain wood fibers, raise their grain (making wood
feel "fuzzy"), and extract natural resins. In addition, immersion can
dissolve glues and swell wood so badly that it warps or falls apart.
This won't happen if the operator removes the item from the tank
as soon as the paint is softened. In practice, however, such care is
not always exercised.
Professional paint removers, whose workplaces are regulated
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, achieve
better results with the solvent method. Oversoaking is less likely
to produce ruined goods. Still, because some companies that use
solvents on items rinse them in water, wood grain can rise and
iron parts can rust. Fortunately, there are solvent systems that
avoid the use of water.
Consumers Union testers took old chairs and shutters to two
professional paint removers. Both stripped with solvents: one used
methylene chloride, hand scraping, and a water washdown; the
other used xylol and dimethyl formamide (DMF) , first as a bath
and then in a spray that dislodged the softened paint. DMF
worked very well. The methylene chloride cleaning was a bit less
satisfactory: The shutter had some raised grain and'mild ruston its
fittilfgs; the chair retained patches of paint and showed signs of
too much scraping.
RECOMMENDATIONS

First, make sure you don't have lead paint. If you do, choose a
chemical stripper. Do not use a heat gun.
Any chemical or heat gun will remove paint, which makes the

126

MISCELLANEOUS

safety factor paramount. Solvent-based strippers, particularly those
containing methylene chloride, pose serious health hazards when
used indoors .. Adequate ventilation may not be enough. Protect
your eyes and hands, and wear a respirator. If you choose a solvent product, try to use it outdoors. Better yet, consider going to
a professional paint remover, who is likely to do a better job. But
this won't work for built-in cabinets,window frames, baseboards,
and other nonremovable woodwork.
For immovable items, such as banisters, moldings, and door
jambs, try a heat gun (if lead is not a factor) or one of the less toxic
chemicals. Although the nonsolvent products are slow and expensive, they're safer than the others.
Heat guns work faster than chemicals but require precautions
to minimize charring and the risk of burns and fire. However, heat
guns aren't effective on metal and won't strip clear finishes. Don't
succumb · to the seemingly attractive idea of mounting a · scraping
blade on t~e nozzle of a heat gun. It doesn't take long for the soft-.
ened paint to pile up. When it does, you have to remove it. Steer
clear of any device that encourages probing around the tip of a
hot heat gun.
MECHANICAL PAINT REMOVERS

Scrapers, rasps, and sandpaper substitutes are available. Each type
has its uses, however specialized. Since none is really expensive,
it's a good idea to keep more than one type in your tool kit. For
chemical or solvent stripping of fine furniture, use wood or plastic scrapers to avoid gouging the surface. Because they create lots
of chips and dust, these methods should not be used to remove
lead paint.
Hook scrapers. A hook scraper is best suited for removing loose
paint from flat surfaces. It looks something like an extra-large

PAINT REMOVAL

127

razor with a stiff, fairly dull blade. And like a razor, it's pulled
along the work surface, so the edge of the blade scrapes away
the paint.
Push scrapers. These resemble the familiar putty knife, although
they vary in details. Some have a long handle, others a short one.
Some have a blunt edge, others are sharpened. You have your
choice of stiff or flexible blades in several widths; the differences
are of minor importance. You should try to match the shape and
size of the scraper to the job at hand-a narrow-bladed scraper,
for example, will work best in and around window frames. Push
scrapers are useful onflat surfaces and for digging paint out of
corners, but they are not meant to be used on curves. In general,
they are less effective than hook scrapers on all but the loosest
paint. It's harder to push a scraper than to pull it.
Rasps and abrasive blocks. These devices can scrape and sand,
and are generally available in a variety of sizes and abrasive
grades. Rasps and blocks can also be used for sanding wood.
Their shape, however, limits their use primarily to flat surfaces.
Sandpaper substitutes. Unlike rasps and sanding blocks, sandpaper substitutes are fairly flexible, so they can get into places that
the others can't. Typically, they are rectangles of tough cloth
coated on both sides with sheets of abrasive-coated nylon mesh,
or a thin sheet of metal punched with ragged holes. Sandpaper
substitutes are durable and fast cutting; they can be wrapped
around a dowel to sand a concave surface or can be used with a
sanding block. Some may leave the surface rather rough, making
it necessary to do some sanding before painting.
Sponges and glass blocks. To sand moldings and other complex
shapes, woodworkers often wrap sandpaper around a sponge.
Sanding sponges come essentially prewrapped, with an abrasive
coating that covers four sides. They are springy and flexible, as

128

MISCELLANEOUS

you'd expect sponges to be. They can also be rinsed out to unclog the abrasive. Foamed glass blocks resemble chunks of hardened plastic foam. They wear away quite rapidly as they're used;
leaving a residue of-glass dust in the work area.
Steel wool. Do not use steel wool where the fine metal shards
may be exposed to water (including water-based varnishes) because steel wool rusts and leaves a visible stain.
SAFETY
Paint removal, especially with power tools, requires certain safety
precautions. To guard against the obvious hazard-flying chips of
paint or grit-you should wear safety goggles or a face shield,
work gloves, and a heavy jacket. Hearing protectors are also advisable.
You should guard against health hazards that may not be immediately apparent, such as the problem of lead. The key to
preparing lead-painted surfaces for repainting is dust control. If
you're doing the job yourself,take the following precautions:
•
•
•
•
•

Thoroughly cover the area with heavy plastic drop cloths.
Remove furniture or wrap ·it ·in plastic.
Tape ·plastic over doors and windows.
Wear plastic booties over your shoes.
Rent or buy a HEPA respirator designed to filter lead dust. Keep
it on while ·disposing of the drop cloths and plastic coverings.
• Wet the surface with a spray bottle before scraping or sanding
with a wet/ dry abrasive.
• Instead of sanding to "rough .up" a glossy surface, use a chemical etcher.
• Thoroughly clean all surfaces after the stripping process. Scrub
with water plus a phosphate detergent. If you live in an area that
bans phosphate, try using a powdered dishwasher detergent.

POWER BLOWERS

129

• Wring out the sponge, mop, or rag in a separate bucket so you
don't recycle the lead in the cleaning solution, and change the
rinse water frequently.
If you hire a contractor, be sure to find one who will use these
techniques. Look for a contractor who is certified or licensed for
lead safety. Otherwise, you could prepare the most deteriorated
spots to paint yourself, then hire a regular contractor to do the
rest-with strict instructions not to sand or scrape.
POWER BLOWERS

People use a power blower to clean up leaves and spread grass
clippings after mowing, to vacuum · debris from decks and sidewalks, even to dry up puddles in the driveway. These versatile
machines take some of the work out of tidying a lawn. But with
more blowers running longer for more of the year, the noise from
a blower-about the same as that from a very loud lawn mowerhas become an unacceptable intrusion in hundreds of communities. More than 280 towns and cities have restricted the use of
power blowers, and a handful have banned them entirely.
Noise level is one of the factors · when looking at gasolinepowered and electric handheld blowers (the kind. most people
buy), as well as backpack models similar to those used by the
pros. Most of the handheld blowers work as both a vacuum and
as a blower; some lower-priced models are blowers only.
Electric blowers, the quieter type, used to be conSiderably
weaker than gasoline-powered ones. But fairly quiet gas blowers
and powerful electrics both exist.

How THEY PERFORM
Noise. Gasoline-powered models produce enough noise to war-

130

MISCELLANEOUS

rant wearing ear protectors. The average electric blower typically
creates about half the racket of a gasoline model and so doesn't
demand hearing protection. The noisiest gas-powered blowers
might make you less popular with the neighbors.
Blowingpower. A blower's effectiveness at piling up leaves is not
necessarily related to engine size and horsepower or motor amperage, or to the manufacturer's claimed nozzle air speed.
The best way to assess a blower's effectiveness is to blow leaves
into elongated rows. The most powerful blowers can build
rows 18 incheshigh~the weakest, only 8 to 10 inches. That may
not seem like much of a range, but a pile 18 inches high may
contain more than three times as many leaves as one 10
inches high. The weakest power blowers are adequate only if you
BACKPACK BLOWERS

Professional lawn-care services use backpack blowers. The backpack's weight, in the neighborhood of 20 pounds, isn't a drawback once the unit is donned and properly adjusted. It's also
much less fatiguing than a hand-held blower for big lawn-cleaning jobs. For the' most part, backpack blowers are comfortable
and easy to handle, and several have conveniences like a handle
with the throttle and On/Off switches on the blower tube, a large
fuel-filler opening,and a throttle control you can preset.
Nevertheless, these high-priced machines have limitations.
They don't vacuum. They are all very loud. And, despite their
size, they aren't inherently more powerful than regular blowers.
In fact, several handheld models can equal the blowing power of
the b<;!st backpacks. Unless you have a big yard or a yen to look
like a pro, there's little reason to buy a backpack.

POWER BLOWERS

131

have a small lawn, or if you mainly need to clear driveways and
other hard surfaces.
Blower cleaning. A blower may have the power to pile up plenty
of leaves but still lack some lawn-cleaning ability. You should assess a blower's ability to rid a lawn of all leaves in areas with
heavy leaf accumulations amid grass about three inches high.
The blowers that clean best are those '\Yith a round-end blower
nozzle. All the so-so blowers have a "diffuser" nozzle that's roughly
rectangular at the end.
Blower handling. A blower handles well if it's ' easy to moye in a
sweeping side-to-side motion. A good blower should also be easy
to hold in the odd and varying positions sometimes necessary 'fot
cleaning out tight spots.
Two forces conspire to make handling more difficult: the downward thrust caused by the curved shape of most blower nozzles,
and the resistance to back-and-forth motion generated by models
with a 'horizontal driveshaft.
One feature helped mitigate the effect of the downward thrust:
a comfortable, well-positioned second handle.

How 71iEY VACUlM
Speed. The collection bags that come with blowers don't hold
enough to make them practical for vacuuming an entire lawn,
even though the machines shred vacuumed material to greatly reduce its volume. But these machines are handy for vacuuming
leaves away from shrubs, flower beds, and other pla<;:es where
raking or blowing proves impractical.
Handling. The easiest blowers to handle have effective, wellpositioned, and comfortable handles; don't vibrate much; and
don't make you stoop to hold the end of the suction tube ' at
ground level.

132

MISCELLANEOUS

CONVEMENCE

Blowers judged convenient typically had these handy features:. For
gasoline-powered models, a starter cord near the engine housing's
center line, so pulling the cord didn't make the blower twist; an
engine-kill switch you can reach with the same hand that holds
the main handle; and a throttle that lets you pres'et two or more
positions. For electric blowers, an On/Off switch that you can
reach with the hand holding the main handle and a second, lowerspeed setting for those times when you don't need too much
power.
WATER TREATMENT

Public concern over the quality of drinking water often centers on
how the water looks, smells, or tastes. But such aesthetic problems
are usually caused by calcium, sulfur, chlorine,or iron, which are
harmless. Of more concern are pollutants such as lead, radon, and
nitrate, which pose a health hazard.
Before buying any equipment or taking the expensive route of
buying bottled water, find out what's in your water.
You can ask the water company for a copy of its latest water
analysis. Or, if you draw water from a private well, call the local
public health department to find out about any groundwater problems. (If testing is warranted, see page 134.)
Water-treatment devices range from simple filtering carafes and
faucet attachments to whole-house systems. They're sold in places
as diverse as drugstores and TV home-shopping networks. As a
rule, hardware stores, home centers, department stores, and mass
merchandisers sell the more modest devices for as little as $20.
Sophisticated systems, which can cost more than $1000, are sold
by water treatment dealers and direct-marketing companies. Major
brands include Ametek, Amway, Brita, Culligan, Glacier Pure,

WATER TREATMENT

133

Instapure (Teledyne/WaterPik), Mr. Coffee, NSA, Omni, Pollenex,
Rainsoft, and Sears.
PROBlEM POlLUTANTS

Lead. Chronic lead exposure, even at low levels, could cause per-

manent learning disabilities and hyperactivity. It's particularly
dangerous for pregnant women and children. In adults, chronic
exposure is linked to high blood pressure and anemia.
Lead gets into water primarily through corrosion of household
plumbing and the service line (the pipe connecting the home
plumbing with the water main). Installation of lead service lines
has been banned for nearly a decade, but many homes more than
30 years old still have them. They may also have copper pipes
with lead solder (also banned). Lead in water can also come from
brass in faucets and well pumps.
Since 1991, the u.s. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has
required water companies to run spot tests for lead contamination.
If more than 10 percent of the households checked have lead levels above 15 parts per billion (ppb), the company will have to take
action, either by treating the water or by replacing lead service
lines. The deadline for companies serving more than 50,000 people is January 1997; smaller systems have until 1999.
In 1992, Consumer Reports tested water in the homes of 2,643
readers in ~ight cities, finding worrisome results in some cities, including Chicago, New York, and Boston. Later, 1,280 homes in
those cities and in Portland and St. Paul, where the EPA had found
fairly high lead levels, were tested.
The water supply in Chicago had improved considerably. New
York showed modest improvement. Although Boston has been
treating the water in its reservoir for years, results still show room
for improvement. Lead concentrations remained too high in St.
Paul even after running the water. In Portland, first-draw water

134

MISCELLANEOUS

(which has stood in the pipes for hours) had moderate levels of
lead; purged-line water (drawn after running for a while) had
almost no lead.
To minimize your exposure to lead from pipes, use only cold
water for cooking and drinking; hot water dissolves more lead.
Running the water for a minute or so to flush the pipes may help,
but it's not a sure cure. If you have more than 5 ppb of lead in
your water even after letting it run, you need to take action.
Radon. This probably poses a greater health risk than any other
waterborne pollutant. According to the EPA, radon, a naturally occurring radioactive gas, may cause more than 10,000 lung-cancer
deaths each· year. Most of the radon seeps into homes from the
ground. But some well water contains dissolved radon, which escapes into the air from showers and washers.
Waterborne radon is usually confined to private wells or small
community water systems that use wells. Before testing water for
radon, test the air inside your house for radon. If the level is high
WHERE TO GET YOUR WATER TESTED

Companies that sell water-treatment equipment often offer a free
or low-cost water analysis. Don't depend on that kind of test: The
results may be biased. Instead, ask your water company,health
department, or cooperative extension agency for a referral. You
can also check the Yellow Pages under "Laboratories-Testing,"
or contact a mail-order laboratory.
To get water tested for lead by mail, contact any of the following: Clean Water Lead Test Inc., Asheville, N.C., 704251-6800
($17); Environmental Law Foundation, Oakland, Calif., 510 2084555 ($16.50); SAVE, New York, N.Y., 718 626-3936 ($20).
Avoid do-it-yourself home testing kits.

WATER TREATMENT

135

and you use well water, have the water tested. If the level of radon
in the air is low, don't worry about the water.
Although experts disagree as to the level of radon you should
do something about, you should take action if the level in the
water is 10,000 picocuries per liter or higher. Radon is easily dispersed in outdoor air, so aerating the water before it enters the
house is usually the simplest solution. Ventila,ting the bathroom,
laundry room, or kitchen may also help.
Nitrate. High nitrate levels in water pose a risk mainly to infants.
Bacteria in immature digestive tracts convert nitrate into nitrite;
that combines with hemoglobin in the blood to form methemoglobin, which cannot transport oxygen. The reSUlting ailment,
methemoglobinemia, is rare but can result in brain damage or
death. Some adults, including pregnant women, may also be susceptible.
Chemical fertilizers and animal wastes are prime sources of nitrate contamination, so homes in agricultural areas with private
wells should have their water tested regularly. Some state health
departments test wells for free. High nitrate levels may also signal
the presence of <:>ther contaminants.
TREATMENT METHODS

The chart on pages 136-37 shows which technologies work best
for which substances. Some products, called single-stage filters,
use one of the methods explained below; others, called multistage
filters, combine two or more. Note: None are suitable for treating
bacteriologically contaminated water, which requires sterilization
with ultraviolet rays, ozone, or chlorine.
Carbon filtration. This is the most popular method of water
treatment. Carbon filters overcome a variety of problems. They remove residual chlorine, improving the water's taste. They can also
remove organic compounds such as pesticides, solvents, and chlo-

136

WATER TREATMENT

MISCELLANEOUS

WATER PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS

rn

ppm

=parts per million; ppb =parts per billion; pc/l =piccocuries per liter.

[gJ Most will

also remove organic substances.

~

Action level.

~

Some will remove lead.

137

138

MISCELLANEOUS

roform. Some carbon filters are effective for lead; some aren't. The
whole-house variety is especially useful for removing radon.
Where lead contamination is known to be a problem, a larger
filter is better. Small p<?ur-through filters and fist-sized units that
thread onto the faucet can improve the taste of water, but they're
only moderately effective against hazardous chemicals. There, a
high-volume undersink or countertop filter is the best choice.
Replaceable filter cartridges made either with a "carbon block" or
granulated carbon are better than those made with powdered
carbon.
Reverse osmosis (RO). This method excels at removing inorganic
contaminants, such as dissolved salts, ferrous iron, chloride, fluoride,
nitrate, and heavy metals such as lead. RO works slowly, producing
only a few gallons of fresh water per day, and is wasteful-for every
gallon of water purified, several gallons are wasted.
Most O
RO systems use a carbon filter. They have a second filter,
a cellophanelike semipermeable membrane that's easily clogged
by minerals in hard water. (To extend its life, install a separate sediment prefilter upstream of the carbon filter. A 5- to 10-micron
mesh is fine enough.) The membrane needs replacement every
few years, carbon filters more often.
Distillation. Distillation improves the taste of brackish water, and
it d~mine~alizes water polluted with heavy metals. But it's ineffective against volatile organics like chloroform and benzene, which
vaporize in the distiller and wind up in the condensed water. The
process is slow-it takes a couple of hours to produce a quart of
water-and uses a lot of electricity. Since it collects and concentrates minerals, scale can build up quickly and must be cleaned
out.
Water softeners. Water softeners remove hard water minerals,
stain-producing iron and, in some cases, lead, They don't remove
radon, nitrate, or pesticides.

WATER TREATMENT

139

Systems vary in size, but all consist of a large tank near the main
supply of water to a house. As a result, softeners are effective
against lead only if contamination occurs in service lines outside
the house.
Activated alumina. If lead is your only problem, activated alumina cartridges, which come in faucet-mounted filters and in-line
units, are an effective' treatment.
Aeration. Aerators are effective at removing chlorine, radon, benzene, carbon tetrachloride, and trihalomethanes.
TREATMENT PRODUClS

Reverse-osmosis devices are installed in the water line under the
sink by a profeSSional. They have their own spigot and storage
tank. If your household needs maximum lead removal, consider
one of these. Their large storage tank holds a supply of treated
water ample enough for most uses. Operation cost is fairly low.
However, if you should empty the tank, you'll have to wait two or
three hours for it to process another gallon.
Distillers, which aren't plumbed in, sit on the counter and are
plugged into an electric outlet. They're a good choice if you need
highly effective lead removal and don't consume a lot of water.
Although cheaper to buy than a reverse-osmosis system, they're
much more expensive to operate.
Undersink filters are plumbed in and have their own spigot.
This type is best suited for a household that uses a lot of water. It
produces purified water on demand, at a rate of about one-third
gallon a minute. They're less expensive and easier to install than
reverse-osmosis devices. Anundersink filter can be installed by a
do-it-yourselfer whose counter has an opening for the unit's spigot
or who is willing to drill an opening.
Countertop filters sit next to the sink and attach to the existing
faucet with flexible tubing. Like an undersink filter, a countertop

140

MISCELLANEOUS

model provides filtered water on demand, but it requires no
major changes in plumbing. This type of unit takes up counter
space, and its connector tubes can get in the way when you're
using the sink.
Afaucet-mountedfilteris similar to a countertop unit, but it has
no tubing at all, is smaller, and sits atop the faucet. It gives purified water on demand without taking up counter space or requiring much installation. But you may not like the way it looks
perched on your faucet, and it may get in your way.
Carafe filters are stand-alone units that require no connection to
the plumbing. They sit on a counter; you simply pour water
through them. Water poured into the top compartment trickles
through the filter and collects in the pitcher below. A carafe is best
used' to process only small amounts of water, perhaps a gallon or
two a day.
RECOMMENDATIONS

The chart on pages 136-37 summarizes the best methods for the
most common water problems. Before doing business with a
water-treatment company you don't know, call the Better Business
Bureau or a local consumer-protection agency to find out whether
any complaints against the company are unresolved.
DRINKING WATER:

Is IT SAFE

10 SOFTEN THE RULES?

When you turn on the tap for a glass of water, you probably don't
wonder whether it's safe to drink. You don't have to: It usually is.
However, Congress may scale back the regulations that help keep
your water that way as legislators consider c:hanging the Safe
Drinking Water Act.
The act, approved in 1974, was originally passed because some
of the thousands of water systems in the United States were simply not delivering clean water.

WATER TREATMENT

141

The regulations have had a good effect. All public water systerns ·that use surface water now must disinfect it, and most must
filter it. And restrictions on lead in drinking water should help protect 600,000 children who might otherwise have unsafe amounts
of lead in their blood.
But on occasion, people still get sick from contqminants in their
water. The most readily recognized are acute outbreaks of illness
caused by microbes. In the best-known such incident, in 1993,
hundreds of thousands of Milwaukee residents were sickened and
more than 100 killed by cryptosporidium, a microbe not yet covered by water regulations. It's harder to know how many people
are harmed by chronic, low-level exposure to pathogens and chemical contaminants.
Setting limits. Under the Safe Drinking Water Act, the Environmental Protection Agency originally set monitoring requirements
and contaminant limits for 26 substances that can taint drinking
water. The debate over the effectiveness of the act dates back to
1986, when Congress directed the EPA-which had been lackadaisically implementing the act-to add 57 more substances, such
as benzene and dioxin, to the list of contaminants that water systems must monitor and limit. Congress'also told the EPA to add 25
new contaminants to the list every three years.
Those changes, critics say, cost too much. Nearly 90 percent of
the nation's 58,000 community water systems are small ones, serving fewer than 3,300 people. Many of those systems say they have
neither the staff nor the money to obey the 1986 regulations.
Indeed, in 1994, community water systems were cited for about
100,000 violations of the Safe Drinking Water Act. Most of those
cited were small systems that were not complying with monitoring and reporting requirements rather than systems found to have
dirty water.
Complying with the regulations could add several hundred dol-

142

MISCELLANEOUS

lars a year to the water bills paid by customers of some small
water systems.
Realistic regulations. Under pressure from water companies,
local officials, and governors, the Senate came up with a plan for
lightening the burden on water suppliers.
Small systems' testing requirements would be eased. Already, a
state can let a .water system skip particular tests if its water source
is protected from contamination, or if a particular contaminant,
such as a pesticide, was never used in the area. Under the proposal, states could issue testing exemptions much more freely.
Also, for any contaminants that don't cause acute health problems, the water systems would be able to test just once a year, or
in some cases once every three years if the first test was clean, instead of quarterly testing.
Rules for cleaning up contamination would be lighter too. The
EPA would require cleanup technologies that the small systems
could more realistically afford, rather than base its standards on
the best available methods that a large system can afford.
What's more, the proposed law would allow water systems that
serve as many as 10,000 people to fail to meet federal health standards, if they can't afford to comply and if no unreasonable health
risk would be created. As of 1995, only the very smallest systems-those that serve fewer than 500 households--can obtain
such a waiver.
Finally, the bill proposes! that the federal government give the
states a total of $lbillion in loans and grants to help small water
systems improve their facilities.
Going too far. It makes sense for Congress to revise a law that
doesn't adequately account for the limited staff and resources of
small water systems. No one is being served if those suppliers are
just racking up violations instead of actually testing their water. But
just as the 1986 law is too broad, so are the proposed revisions.

WATER TREATMENT

143

The problem is that the Senate bill doesn't just give small water
systems a break; it also eases up on the large systems that serve
most Americans.
The standards for cleanup technology would be made more lenient for large systems-an unnecessary move. And the bill would
grant water systems three to five years to comply with any new or
revised federal health standards, up from 18 months.
The bill also gives the EPA five or six years to develop several
new standards that are already behind schedule. The limit onarsenic in drinking water, which dates from 1942, was to have been
revised in 1989. Now it won't be updated until 2001. Limits on
"disinfection byproducts," such as the potentially cancer-causing
compounds created when chlorine is added to water, once were
due in 1989 but now could be .delayed until 2000. Existing court
orders requiring the EPA to issue rules for about a doz<;:n contaminants would be nullified. Even the rules being · developed to
thwart cryptosporidium could be delayed by extra regulatory
hurdles.
What's more, the pace of new contaminant limits could be
greatly slowed. Instead of setting standards for 25 contaminants
every three years, the EPA would have to consider just five by
2001.
Those changes are a false economy. It's unwise to act as though
we know there are few new contaminants of any consequence to
be found. For people served by large water systems, the water bill
would go up only about $25 a year if all the EPA regulations go
into effect on schedule. That seems like a small price to pay to be
sure that the water is safe.

Personal Care
FACIAL CLEANSERS

The main purpose of a facial cleanser is to remove makeup and
grime. Soap and water do that, of course, but too much soap can
remove a skin's natural oils, leaving it rough, chapped, and tender. Soap and water also have less clout than cleanser in removing heavy makeup.
A typical cleanser, whether cream or lotion, contains water;
glycerine or other moisturizers; oils, fats, or greases (to give the
product the right consistency and to help loosen grime); detergents (to wash away grime); preservatives (to forestall spoilage);
and dyes and scent .(to make it look and smell good).
The archetypal cleanser is the traditional "cold cream" that you
massage into your skin, then wipe off. Pond's Cold Cream and its
descendants-including wipe-off lotions-'-are still very popular.
Years ago, however, Noxzema cream in the blue jar pointed the
way toward a revolutionary alternative: a less greasy substance
you can wash off with water. Today, there are as many wash-off
creams and lotions as there are those that you have to wipe off.
There are also creams and lotions that you can remove either way.
The results of use tests conducted by Consumers Union showed
that the preferences for cleansers specified by their makers for
normal, dry, oily, or "combination" skin seemed to have no con-

145

146

PERSONAL CARE

nection with skin type. Some women with dry skin preferred oilyskin products, some with normal skin liked dry-skin formulations,
and so on.
PREFERENCES

An effective cleanser should be easy to apply and remove, take off
makeup efficiently, smell pleasant, feel good on the skin during
use, and leave the skin feeling nice.
Some cleansers are hard to remove. Removing sOme of the
wash-off products can take more than a dozen rinses.
Cleansers should leave the skin feeling nice ("smooth" or
"creamy"), but some may leave the skin feeling slightly coated, or
dry and stiff. And some may leave the skin feeling greasy.
Most products have a scent, ranging in type from medicinal
through spicy to floral. Some cleansers claim to be fragrance-free,
but most of those have their own smell from ingredients not added
for their fragrance, which you mayor may not find pleasing.
Scent can play an important if unconscious role in judgment of
overall quality. When Consumers Union's panelists scored a product low in smell, they generally gave it a low overall score.
COST, SIZE, QUALITY

Cleansers come in a variety of sizes. The price range is astonishingly wide, as it often is in the world of cosmetics. Priee per ounce
can vary considerably with container size.

FACIAL TISSUES
Tissues are used to handle all sorts of jobs-to wipe eyeglasses, to
remove makeup, and as a stand-in for a napkin or a towel. But
you expect most from a tissue when your nose runs nonstop and

FACIAL TISSUES

147

your eyes water. A tissue shouldn't shred when you ;meeze into it,
arid you don't want one so harsh and scratchy that it chafes your
nose. Yet you want something fairly economical. If the tissues are
packed in a box to match your decor, so much the better.
QUALITY

Consumers Union tested tissues for sneeze resistance, wet
strength, and softness. Since people can't be expected to sneeze
on demand or to sneeze exactly the same way time after time,
Consumers Union invented a mechanical sneezer to test tissues.
The most sneeze-resistant tissues usually withstood the test just
fine, but the worst were almost always shot through.
To measure strength when wet, testers clamped each tissue in
an embroidery hoop, d~mpened it with a measured amount of
water, then poured a slow, steady stream of lead shot onto the
tissue. The strongest ones held more than 10 ounces of shot before they broke; they are the tissues Iyou can count on to handle
the most demanding jobs without dis~ntegrating. The weakest tissues ruptured under about one ounce of weight. The thickest tissu~s tested were the three-ply, which weren't the' strongest.
Several two-ply varieties were even stronger; some others were
just as strong.
Manufacturers often make facial tissues in more than one plant
around the country to cut down on shipping costs. This practice
could create variations in the same brand of tissue purchased in
different areas. With few exceptions, however, the tissues bought
from stores in the East, South, and West were quite consistent.
RECOMMENDATIONS

It doesn't make much sense to spend a lot of money on .a throw-

away product like facial tissue. But it does make sense to buy tis-

148

PERSONAL CARE

sues that are reasonably soft, suitably strong, and low in price. The
softest tissues are obviously the most soothing for a proloD;ged
cold or bout of hay fever. Those with only average softness are
fine for .everyday use.

HAND SOAPS
Soaps were the first surface-active agents prepared by .man. They
are the salts of water-insoluble fatty acids. Detergents are chemically different from soaps. Both are able to emulsify oils, hold dirt
in suspension, and act as wetting agents. Since the 1950s, some
soaps have incl~ded detergents, which work better than soap in
hard water. (Soap combines with the minerals in hard water, leaving a bathtub ring; detergents do not tend to form such scum.)
Most liquid products are basically detergent, not soap.
You can wash your hands for a penny with most soaps, but
some deSigner .brands cost around 4 or 5 cents per wash. Here's
what a soap maker can do to make a penny's wash seem worth a
nickel, a dime, or a quarter:

• Add fancy perfume. In its natural state, soap smells somewhat
like the fat in fresh meat. Fragrance masks this odor. Some soap
makers think that if they mask the odor well enough, it will upscale their product from the supermarket shelf--where soap
can cost a dollar or less per bar-to the beauty counter at department stores, where you can easily pay $10 a bar.
• Appeal to health. The package ~ay claim that the soap is "hypoallergenic" or "noncomedogenic" (that means the soap won't
clog pores and promote blackheads, or comedones). A manu'facturer makes formulations for different skin types.
• Promise beauty. Manufacturers pledge that added emollients-

HAND SOAPS

149

bath oil; moisturizing cream, lanolin, vitamin E-will soften and
condition skin. (As the Better Business Bureau reports, no soap
can be truthfully represented to keep skin young! and none
may be advertised "as a cure, remedy, or competent treatment"
for any skin disease.)
• Prevent embarrassment. Some brands claim that they are able
to keep body odor at bay. These deodorant soaps usually include an antibacterial agent. (Perspiration itself doesn't smell.
Body odor is caused by bacteria that act on perspiration.) All
provide protection against unwanted odors because .all soaps
float off bacteria along with dirt and grease.
PERFORMANCE

Consumers Union found that all soaps tested by a panel were at least
good in cleaning or in the way they left hands feeling, but some
clearly performed better than others. Liquids generally didn't feel as
good on the skin as bar soap, probably because they are more likely
to contain detergent, which tends to feel harsher than soap.
Soap and detergent can dry the skin because they remove its natural oils. Once its oil coating is gone, the skin reaqily gi~es up water.
Most soaps have emollients, which may help seal in moisture.
If you have dry skin, however, don't look for some magic soap
formula to provide relief. Apply baby oil or a moisturizer after
bathing, while the skin is still damp.
COST

It makes no sense to pay more than a penny a wash for soap. On
average, liquid soaps are slightly more .expensive to use.than bars,
and their plastic containers often leave more packaging waste.
(For many liquids, a pump refill is available, but then the refill bottle is tossed out.)

150

PERSONAL

CARE

TOILET TISSUES
Whatever the price per roll, you expect certain basic qualities in
this homely but indispensable product.
The stronger the tissue when wet, the less likely it is to break
or te~r in use. Wet strength is far more important than dry strength.
Two-ply tissues are stronger as a group, but there are some strong
single-plies, too.
Most toilet tissues are soft enough for all but sensitive individuals. Many people won't find even the roughest toilet tissues objectionable. Two-ply tissues are generally softer than single-ply.
Toilet tissues should quickly and thoroughly absorb moisture.
When last tested, two-ply models soaked up a drop of water
within five seconds or less. Most single-ply tissues were not quite
as absorbent.
Tissues should break up promptly when flushed away. If they
don't, a slow toilet may back up . .
Some tissues are scented. Scent serves no practical purpose in
bathroom tissues, and it may be irritating to some people.
CONVENIENCE

Some tissues come in single rolls, some in packages of 12 or more.
Four-packs are the most popular.
A package should be easy to open, the roll should be easy to
start, and tissues should be easy to tear off. Plastic packages with
perforations around the top are easiest to open.
On some rolis, the first few sheets stick to the ones underneath,
an annoyance when you begin using the roll. On others, the end
of. the first sheet hangs free, providing a pull tab that's easy to
grasp. Sometimes the tab works well; sometimes it shreds before
freeing the next sheet.
Most two-ply models are relatively easy to detach, thanks to

TOILET TIssUES

151

their adequate perforations. By contrast, some single-ply products
are flimsy and tend to tear raggedly.
SUMMARY

No tissues have all four qualities: softness, strength, ability to tear
easily, and inexpensiveness. Some qualities are mutually exclusive. For example, softness generally doesn't go with strength.
Then again, perhaps all the fuss about softness is unnecessary.

AppendixA

TIPS FOR CLEANING
A VARIETY OF HOUSEHOLD ITEMS
Acetate fabric. Dry cleaning is safest for this delicate fabric even
if there are laundering instructions on the care label. Hand laundering must be carefully done. Avoid wringing or twisting garments. Dry acetate items by carefully spreading them out on
terry-cloth bath towels on a horizontal surface or draping them
over a clothesline. Do not use nail polish remover or other cleaners that contain acetone to attempt to remove stains. Acetone will
dissolve acetate.
Acrylic furniture. Gently dust acrylic furniture with a damp cloth
or chamois. Wash with hand dishwashing liquid and water using
a soft cloth. Rinse with water and blot dry with a clean cloth.
Air conditioners. Clean or change a window air conditioner's filter once a month during the air-conditioning season to keep the
machine's efficiency as high as possible. When cleaning or changing the filter, vacuum clean any visible cooling coils. (Be careful
not to cut yourself on sharp edges.) Plastic foam filters can be
washed at the kitchen sink, using a mild solution of a. hand dishwashing liquid and water. Condenser coils facing outside also
need cleaning before hot weather sets in, but the unit may have
to be removed from the window to do the job. In very sooty areas,
or when the air conditioner is in a window over a heavily traf-

153

154

APPENDIX

A

ficked street, you may need to hire a professional firm to do the
cleaning.

Aluminum cookware. Acidic foods-such as tomatoes or
rhubarb-may remove stains or discolorations as they are being ·
cooked. You can also boil a solution of one quart of water containing 2 to 3 tablespoons of vinegar or lemon juice in the cookware, followed by light rubbing with a soap-filled scouring pad.
Aluminum scuffs. Some porcelain sinks, especially older ones
with a bit of their enamel worn off, tend to collect scuff marks
from aluminum pots and pans. A good cleanser should readily remove these marks. Cover the stain with the cleanser for a few minutes, then rinse it off.
Appliance exteriors. Many kitchen and laundry appliances
have a baked enamel surface that scratches easily', unlike the
glass-hard porcelain enamel finish that is common on kitchen
ranges as well as on some washing machines or other appliance
tops. Never use an abrasive cleaner on baked enamel. Hand dishwashing liquid and water should do the job. If this doesn't work,
a liquid all-purpose cleaner can help, but check the label instructions to be sure the manufacturer states that it is safe to use on
painted surfaces.
Asphalt tile. Damp mop forday-to-day cleaning. Don't use solvent-based wax; the solvent can soften and damage the tile.
Audiotape recording and playback heads. It is importaht to
periodically clean recording and playback heads, capstans, pinch
rollers, and tape guides. Once a month is probably a reasonable
interval. Use a small cotton swab or-even better-a lint-free

TIPS FOR CLEANING

155

piece of cotton cloth wrapped around the swab. The swab or cloth
should be lightly moistened with cleaning agent. You can use rubbing alcohol (isopropyl alcohol), but it is probably safer and better to buy tape-head cleaner from an electronics supply store. If
the deck or tape player is not accessible for cleaning, you might
try a special head-cleaning tape. Carefully follow instructions.
Never use any kind of abrasive material to clean the heads.

Auto carpeting, upholstery, and mats. Regular vacuuming is
important to prevent buildup of particulate matter that can contribute to carpet wear. A plug-in, lightweight, handheld vacuum
cleaner works best. A cordless model with rechargeable batteries
may work well enough on loose surface litter.
Barbecue griUs. If you run a gas barbecue for about 15 minutes
at the highest heat setting-after you finish cooking-it should
look reasonably clean but may still need some wire brushing to
get rid of any heavy residue. When using a charcoal barbecue, let
the grill stand over the coals for about 20 minutes after cooking to
achieve similar results. Any remaining baked-on dirt should yield
to wire brushing or to an abrasive powdered cleaner.
Bath mats. Many bath mats and toilet tank covers can be cleaned
in a washing machine. Use a mild detergent at a setting of not
more than 900 F for dark colors and J05°F for light colors or
whites, rinse thoroughly, and tumble dry using a low temperature
setting. In lieu of machine drying, hang or spread items in the
shade until dry, then brush lightly.
Bathroom fixtures. Some bathroom cleaners can mar brass,
paint, stainless steel, vinyl shower curtains, or wallpaper.
Immediately rinse off cleaner to avoid damage.

156

ApPENDIX A

Blankets. Read and follow the manufacturer's care instructions.
For best results, wash each blanket separately. Be sure the blanket dries evenly. Nonwoven blankets contain synthetic' fibers that
are pressed together and heat bonded. They should be machine
washed with a gentle cycle, using warm water and a high water
level, then air dried. Vellux nonwoven blankets use adhesives to
bond the fibers to a foam base. They should be washed using
a short agitation cycle of five to eight minutes .. Vellux blankets
can be tumble dried at low heat. Wool blankets should be
machine washed in cold water on the delicate cycle; tumble dry
on low heat.
Blenders. Glass containers stay better-looking longer than plastic
ones because they resist scratching and staining; a glass container
should be dishwasher safe. A plastic container probably should
not go into a dishwater, as it might soften or melt if placed too
close to the machine's heating element. As an alternative to hand
washing, fill with water, add a few drops of hand dishwashing liquid, cover, and blend the solution on the Stir setting for 10 to 20
seconds or until the sides are clean; then rinse thoroughly.
Brass. Lacquered brass should be clean~d only with hand
dishwashing liquid and water. Anything stronger may ruin the
finish. Clean uniacquered brass with a commercial copper or
brass cleaner, then wash in sudsy water and rinse. Buff with a. soft
clean cloth.
Butcher blocks. See Wooden work surfaces,
Camcorders. To clean the lens surface, first blow off dust with a
blower brush .. Then, to remove any smudges or fingerprints, gently wipe the lens surface with a piece of lens cleaning paper or a

nps

FOR CLEANING

157

clean cotton cloth moistened with a drop or two of lens-cleaning
fluid (available at camera stores). Clean in a spiral motion from the
center outward.
A noisy picture during playback can be caused by an incorrectly
set tracking control, by clogged video heads, or by a circuit failure. Preferably, video head cleaning should be performed by a
qualified service technicia.n. An alternate solution is to use a head~
cleaning cassette-but only when necessary. Cautiously use the
cleaning cassette in strict accordance with the manufacwrer's instructions. If the cleaning tape doesn't restore the picture in a few
tries, profeSSional servicing may be necessary.

Cameras. To clean the lens surface, first blow off dust with a
blower brush. Then, to remove any smudges or fingerprints, gently wipe the lens surface with a piece of lens cleaning paper or a
clean cotton cloth moistened with a drop or two of lens-cleaning
fluid (available at camera stores). Clean in a spiral motion from the
center outward.
Caution: Do not use film cleaner. It contains organic
solvents that may damage the lens or camera finish.
With proper care, the mirror and focusing screen in an SLRcam~
era should stay clean enough. If cleaning becomes necessary, use
a blower brush. If more cleaning is necessary, never attempt to do
it yourself. Take the camera to an authorized service facility.
Use a blower brush to remove accumulated film dust particles
from the film chamber, being"careful not to touch the shutter. Store
the blower brush in a container or plastic bag to keep it clean.

Carpet grit. Use a full-size upright vacuum cleaner or canister
model with a power nozzle. Vacuum on a regular basis. This is

158

APPENDIX

A

especially important near entrance doors and in heavily traveled
areas.

cat lUter box. Use hot water and hand dishwasher . liquid .to
clean litter box surfaces. Avoid using chlorine bleach for cleaning:
Fumes are created through a chemical reaction between the
bleach and residual ammonia remaining ·in a litter box after it has
been emptied.
Cbl"" dlsbware. It's best to wash fine china by hand with a hand
dishwashing liqUid. Some dishwasher detergents may wear away
the overglaze and metallic decorations on some fine china, .and
fine china can easily be chipped or broken by forceful water jets
or jostling among pots and pans. Everyday china can be washed
in the dishwasher.

Citrus juicers. The easiest-to-clean juicer has the cone, strainer,
and juice container as a single unit. Models with several pieces
have to be taken apart, washed, dried, and put back together. It's
helpful if the pieces can be put into a dishwasher; check the manufacturer's instructions.

Ootbes dryers. Clean a dryer's lint screen after each load. This
will maintain high drying efficiency and will help to prevent
excessive heat buildup. Vacuum clean any visible lint buildup in
other parts of the machine, but leave any disassembling to a service technician.

CoUeemakers. The carafe and brew basket of a drip-type cof- ·
feemaker should be cleaned after every use because dried coffee
oils can ruin the taste of even the best blend. Coffee taste may also

TIPS FOR CLEANING

159

be improved by using a special coffeemaker cleaner. Because minerals accumulate in the tank and tubes of automatic-drip units, it's
important to clean them now and then, especially if they are used
with hard water. As a substitute for a commercial cleaner, try running white vinegar diluted with water through the machine. It's a
chore, but worth the trouble.

Compact discs (CDs). Light dust will not harm a CD. Heavier
dust can be removed by gentle strokes with a soft, lint.:.free cloth.
Always wipe the CD in the radial direction-across the "grooves."
Radial scratches will be ignored by the CD player. Smudges or deposits should be washed off under running water with a little hand
dishwashing liquid if needed; then rinse the CD, allow the excess
water to run off and carefully pat it dry with a soft lint-free cloth.
Computer keyboards. Vacuum keyboards regularly, using
the soft brush attachment. To dislodge particles of dirt and dust,
turn the keyboard upside down and .hit it several times with the
flat of your hand. You can also use a can of compressed air (available from electronics stores). Periodically, clean the keys with eithera lint-free cloth dipped in rubbing alcohol or a commercial
keyboard wipe. Be sure to unplug the keyboard first, or shutthe
computer off.
Computer monitors. See Television sets.
Concrete floors. Many methods recommended for removing
stains from concrete involve use of strong solvents like trisodium
phosphate or flammable materials like kerosene, and lots of elbow
grease. Because of safety concerns, Consumers Union cannot recommend a home brew for this purpose. However, there are some

160

ApPENDIX A

commercially available products that may do the job. It is extremely important to read and carefully follow the directions and
safety precautions when using these products.

Continuous-cleaning ovens. The porous finish of a continuouscleaning oven is supposed to dissipate light dirt gradually at normal cooking temperatures. But majorspills won't go away-you
have to wipe them up right after they happen. Minor spill's appear
to be eliminated slowly, partly because they spread out on the finish, which is mottled, thereby helping to disguise patches of dirt.
You -can protect most exposed surfaces from becoming soiled in
the first place by covering the oven bottom with aluminum foil,
but be careful to avoid blockingany vents in a gas oven or shortcircuiting an electric element.

Copper cookware. Clean with a commercial copper cleaner,
then wash in sudsy water and rinse. Buff with a soft clean cloth.

Countertops. A quick wipe with a damp cloth or with a cloth containing a mild solution of hand dishwashing liquid will take care of
most spills on laminated countertops. Be sure to remove any puddles immediately, to avoid warping. Never use an abrasive cleanser
on aplastic-laminate surface. For more difficult stains, clean these
easy-to-scratch surfaces with the gentlest all-purpose cleaner possible, rinse thoroughly, and dry with a soft cloth. For very stubborn
spots (like newsprint ink), use undiluted liquid household bleach,
being sure to follow the label directions for proper use. Let the
bleach stand for no more than 11/2 minutes and then rinse thoroughly with .warm water. In the bathroom, liquid cleaners should
be rinsed off to prevent damage to the countertop finish.

Curtains. Vacuum thin fabrics at a reduced suction setting to pre-

TIps FOR CLEANING

161

vent the fabric from being drawn into the cleaner's nozzle. It might
be helpful to place a stiff piece .of plastic screen between the
nozzle and the fabric, to prevent the fabric froin being sucked into
the nozzle.

Debumldlfiers. Vacuum the coils at least once a year, more.often
in. a dusty environment. This will help maintain the appliance's
performance.
DeUcatefabrlcs. Follow the manufacturer's care and cleaning instructions.The less time some delicate fabrics spend .in water,
even cold water, the better.
tHsb sanlHzlng. Some dishwashers have · a final rinse cycle
that uses extra-hot water. Their makers claim that this. helps prevent the spread of cold and flu germs. In fact, once you put "sanitized" dishes into the cupboard, household microbes-the same
microbes that are on everything else in the house---quickly settle
on them.
DIsinfecting. It's really not possible to prevent the spread of
germs in the house by using a disinfectant. ' When a medical prohlem arises that requires using a germicide, ask a doctor for advice
on how to proceed.
Dust on hard surfaces. A little bit of spray furniture polish on

a rag makes the rag tacky enough to pick up more dust than a
dry cloth.

Electric blankets. Follow the manufacturer's instructions for laundering (usually a cold or warm wash and low-heat machine dry:"
ing or, even better, line drying). Never have an electric blanket or

162

APPENDIX

A

pad dry-cleaned; dry-cleaning chemicals can damage the wiring.
Do not machine-dry unless the care label recommends it. Instead,
hang the blanket over two clotheslines or lay it flat to dry.

Electric range tops. Electric coil elements are all self-cleaning,
since spills burn off quickly. If you soak an electric element in
water, it may become damaged. Clean under the control knobs by
pulling them off. Use care when scrubbing around the control
panel: The markings can often be rubbed off with steel wool or
an abrasive powdered cleanser.
You can raise or remove thecooktop to clean beneath it. Bu~
some electric ranges have a fixed cooktop; in that case, you
have to poke your hand through the burner holes. Clean drip
pans and reflector bowls with the least abrasive cleanser . that
will keep them looking up to par. A nevi spare set of drip pans
or reflectors is handy for making the cooktop presentable at a
moment's notice.
Smooth-top cooktops should be cleaned with a special cleaner
made for such use. Spills of food-especially those containing
sugar-should be wiped up immediately.
Fans. Dirty fan blades impair air-moving efficiency and also detract from the appliance's appearance. Clean metal blades carefully
to prevent bending them, which can cause unwanted vibration
when the fan is turned on. .A whole-house or attic fan's louvers
and screening should be brushed and vacuumed at least once a
season to keep the air-flow rate at the maximum.
Floor cleaning. A lightweight upright vacuum cleaner works well
for picking up loose dirt from bare floors. For stains and adherent
soil, however, uSe a damp (not wet) sponge mop or its equivalent.

TIPS FOR CLEANING

163

Floor wax buildup. Try a wax remover. Use fine steel wool for
stubborn spots.
Food processors. The simple, clean lines of these machines make
for easy cleaning. Use a damp sponge for gaps around switches
and trim.
Freezers. Self-defrosting is available in some upright models: You
can skip the manual defrosting chore and just swab down inside
surfaces with a cleaning solution of baking soda (bicarbonate of
soda) and water.
A chest freezer has a smooth interior and removable wire baskets or dividers instead of shelves. Use a windshield ice scraper to
remove frost and hasten defrosting. An uprigh't freezer requires
more patience because you must wait for the ice to melt off the
cooling C9ils in the shelves. If you use a tool to scrape and pry ice
away to speed the process, the result could be damage to the refrigeration system, which is expensive to repair.
Defrost when the food supply is low. Transfer any remaining
food to an iced picnic chest or to the refrigerator's freezer or cooling compartment. Or wrap food in food wrap, then layers of newspaper for insulation while you defrost. On a very cold winter day,
you may be able to store the food outdoors while you defrost.
Furniture. The original oil or lacquer finish on a piece of. furniture provides the best protection. Quickly clean up spills before
they have a chance to attack the finish. Use the softest cloth possible for dusting.
If you apply polish each· time you dust, excessive wax buildup
can result, causing loss of the wood's natural beauty as well as difficulty in getting the kind of luster you really want. Don't wipe

164

ApPENDIX A

against the grain. Be sure to use soft insulating pads under hot,
heavy, or sharp objects or containers.

Furniture nicks and scratches. Some polishes are colored to
match the furniture wood, and thereby mask the marred area, but
the color match must be accurate for the cover-up to work well.
Garbage disposers. Most manufacturers suggest allowing a disposer to run for 30 to 60 seconds after grinding is finished. Some
also suggest purging the disposer by filling the sink halfway with
water, removing the drain stopper, and turning on the machine for
a few seconds.
Glass-fiber fabrics. This material is resistant to soiling and can
be very decorative. It is fragile and should be carefully hand-laundered and line dried.
Glassware. It is best to wash crystal glassware by hand; there's
a possibility of chipping and breakage if you wash such items in
a machine. Some glassware can become etched as a result of a
chemical r,eactiQn of water, glassware, and detergent ,in a dishwasher. This phenomenon is especially prevalent in soft or soft~
ened water. Etching is irreversible. To minimize it, use a small
amount of detergent and do not exceed 1400 F water temperature.
Underload the dishwasher to permit proper rinsing and draining,
and dry without heat.
Greasy dirt on hard surfaces. Pine oil in some all-purpose
cleaners helps ·penetrate and loosen greasy dirt.
Heaters. Some space heaters have shiny reflecting surfaces to
help direct the heat where you want it. If the shiny area becomes

TIPS FOR CLEANING

165

dulled, the heater will be less effective. After unplugging the appliance, vacuum ariy surfaces yqu can reach.

Heating systems. Vacuum radiators and fins regularly during
the heating .season to keep them at their maximum operating
efficiency. Change or wash any filters in a warm-air heating
system at .least once during the heating season, as well as during
the summer if the air ducts also serve as part of a central airconditioning system.
Hot plates. Unplug before cleaning. Do not immerse in water.
Clean nonburner surfaces with warm ·water and hand dishwashing liquid and a dishcloth, sponge, or plastic scouring pad. For
difficult-to-remove soil, use a fine soapy metal scouring pad. Be
sure to test it first on an inconspicuous area.
Humidifier dust. If you use a cool mist .or ultrasonic humidifier, you may be forever wiping up white dust that settles on furniture a~d other surfaces, even beyond the room in which the
humidifier is located. If you live in a hard-water area, use only
distilled water or demineralized water in cool-mist or ultrasonic
humidifiers.
Humidifiers. Molds and bacteria from humidifiers and vaporizers
may trigger allergic symptoms. Although ultrasonic models do not
emit fine microorganisms, they have been implicated in spraying
fragments of bacteria and molds into the air. Therefore, like coolmist and evaporative humidifiers, an ultrasonic humidifier should
be scrupulously cleaned daily.
After unplugging and emptying the humidifier, clean it as directed by the manufacturer. If there are ·no directions, rinse the
tank with a solution of one tablespoon of chlorine bleach in a pint

166

ApPENDIX A

of water, followed by a thorough rinsing with fresh water. For
large units, use a cup of bleach in a gallon of water, then rinse the
tank thor~:)Ughly with fresh water.
A steam vaporizer, the kind that boils water and produces moisture ip the form of steam, doesn't present problems of molds and
bacteria. But a steam vaporizer must still be cleaned to keep it
working properly. Rust or scale accumulations in a steam vaporizer are harmless but should be rinsed out periodically, particularly
before storing the unit.

Insect killers ("bug zappers"). First unplug the appliance. It's
usually difficult to poke through the outer screen or blow through
it with a vacuum cleaner's exhaust. It's much easier to disassemble the unit, at least to the extent of removing the sides so that the
grid can be brushed off properly.
I

Linen. This is a durable fabric whose appearance and "feel" improve with laundering. Linen that has been chemically treated for
wrinkle resistance may withstand hot-water washing.
Lint on garments. A washing machine's lint filter helps, but tumbling in a clothes dryer may be even more effective. It's worth trying a lint roller or even wrapping Scotch-type sticky tape around
a hand, sticky side out, and patting the garment to remove the lint.
LiUer on carpeting and hard-surface floors. Use a lightweight
vacuum cleaner. Reserve uprights and power brushes for cleaning
deep in a carpet's pile.
Microwave cookware. Except for the browning dishes and the
crevices on some trivets, cleaning microwave cookware should be

TIPS FOR CLEANING

167

easy with just hand dishwashing liquid and water. Some plastic
utensils have a nonstick finish. This is usually unnecessary, since
stuck-on food is seldom a problem in microwave cooking. The
nonstick finishes are probably a drawback because they easily
scratch and quickly look wom. Browning dishes sear food and accumulate a fair amount of burned-on soil that requires some cleaning effort to remove.
Microwave ovens. Wipe the inside with plain water, or water
with a bit of hand dishwashing liquid. Spills and spatters are generally easy to wipe up with a damp (not wet) sponge. Keep the
oven clean to prevent odors from developing.
Mildew around the house. Mildew has an unpleasant odor and
appearance. It's a common household mold that thrives in dark,
damp, poorly ventilated places. Chlorine bleach, diluted according
to label directions, is a good mildew remover for use on colorfast,
waterproof hard surfaces.
Mildew can also be controlled by lowering the humidity in a
closed-in space such as a closet. In very humid weather, when
mildew growth is greatest, use a . continuously burning 60-watt
bulb in a large closet to raise the temperature (and thereby lower
the relative humidity). A smaller bulb can be used in a smaller
enclosure. Be certain that the bulb is well away from any stored
articles.
Mildew in bathrooms. Some specialty bathroom cleaners contain
effective mildew fighters. But liquid chlorine bleach applied according to label directions is an effective mildew cleaner. Because
it can discolor many fabrics and wallpaper, rinse thoroughly any
mildewed surface that has been washed with bleach. Never mix

168

APPENDIX

A

bleach with other cleaning products. Bleach reacts with many
household cleaners and can produce hazardous fumes.
Nylon. White nylon items should be washed separately because of

nylon's tendency to pick up colors froni other items in a laundry
load. Oily substances can stick to nylon. QUickly rinse off these
stains before they have a chance to set.

Ovens. Refer to the Oven Cleaners section in the chapter on
House Cleaning, and Continuous-cleaning ovens and Self-cleaning
ovens in this section.
Painted surfaces. All-purpose cleaners should be tried on an inconspiCUOUS area first. Cleaners containing pine oil can damage
paint. Avoid excessive rubbing and abrasive cleaning.
Polyester. Fabrics containing polyester fibers have a strong affinity for oily substances. Wash oily stains as soon as you notice
them. Try rubbing them with a wet bar of hand soap, then with a
wet towel followed by rinsing. Unfortunately, even qUick attention
may not result,in satisfactory stain removal.
Porcelain enamel bathroom fixtures. Sinks, bathtubs, toilets,
and other plumbing fixtures are generally made of metal with a
heavy outside layer of glasslike porcelain. Porcelain can tolerate
abrasive cleansers without wearing off, but the shiny finish will be
gradually destroyed, making the fixture less resistant to staining
and therefore more difficult to clean. Stick to nonabrasive
cleansers on new or nearly new fixtures.
Porcelain enamel kitchen fixtures. Treat these items as gently

TIPS FOR CLEANING

169

as possible to avoid unsightly scratches that can make future
cleaning increasingly difficult.

Portable food mixers. Crevices and grooves trap food and dirt.
A dampened new toothbrush reserved for this purpose can help.
Rayon. See Silk.
Records, long-playing (LP). Keeping an LP record dust-free is
the best way to make it last longer. Records should be cleaned immediately before you play them with a cloth-pile brush available
from an electronics store. Handle records only by Jheir edges to
;prevent perspiration and skin oils from attaching dust to the
record's surfaces. When putting a record away, make sure the
opening in the inner sleeve doesn't coincide with the opening in
the outer cover. Be sure any commercial record-cleaning spray
you might purchase does not contain .silicone, which can cause
dust to stick to records.
Refrigerator/freezers. The condenser coil, which helps disperse heat, is outSide the cabinet, where it tends to collect dust.
Dust lowers the appliance's efficiency and raises the cost of running it. The condenser should be cleaned once or twice a year,
particularly before the onset of hot weather, because high
outside temperatures impose heavy demands on a refrigerating
system.
It's easy to clean a back-mounted condenser once you pull out
the refrigerator. But in many models, the coil is mounted in a compartment underneath the cabinet. Clean this area py using a condenser~coil cleaning brush (available in hardware ·and appliance
stores) and a vacuum cleaner's crevice tool. Most manufacturers

170

ApPENDIX A

tell you to clean from the front, a task made more difficult if the
coil is under a shield and toward the refrigerator's back. Cleaning
the coil from the back after you remove the cardboard "service access" cover .is a bit easier, but you'll have to wrestle the appliance
from its normal position.
Some older refrigerators have a removable drip pan that can develop odors from food spills that drip into it from inside the re~
frigerator. If possible, check it from time to time, and wash and
rinse the pan using hand dishwashing liquid and water.
Cleaning inside the refrigerator is best done with the mildest
possible detergent or just a damp sponge. Try to avoid scratching
soft plastic surfaces. A solution of baking soda and water is probably enough to do the job if water alone doesn't work. It's particularly important to keep the door seal (gasket) clean: Dirt buildup
impairs the gasket's ability to hold in the cold air.
Resin furniture. A soft cloth and all-purpose, nonabrasive
cleaner will keep resin furniture clean for a longtime.
Self-cleaning ovens. Use the self-cleaning cycle as often as necessary. The energy cost (using national average rates) is less per
cleaning than an application of a chemical cleaner in an oven
without the self-cleaning feature.
The self-cleaning cycle turns the most stubborn spills into a
powdery gray ash residue. At the end of the cycle, simply wipe off
the residue:
The self-cleaning cycle produces smoke and fumes; which exit
through a vent on the back guard of gas models or under a rear
element of electric ovens. If there's a loose duct from the oven to
the rear element, hard-to-clean dirt may be deposited under the
cook top during the cleaning cycle. Ventilate the kitchen during

TIPS FOR CLEANING

171

the self-cleaning cycle to prevent smoke and fume particles from
being deposited on the kitchen's walls and ceiling.
A self-cleaning oven's door and frame usually need some scrubbing outside the door seal, where vaporized soil can leak through.
Use the mildest nonabrasive cleanser. Avoid scrubbing the gasket
itself, except very gently with a sponge that has been dampened
with a solution of hand dishwashing liquid, followed by a sponge
rinse with plain water.

Shavers. Men's electric shavers need daily cleaning. Unclip the
blade cover. Shake and brush clippings from the cutters and the
underside of the head. Once every week 'ot two, the shaver should
be cleaned thoroughly to help maintain its ability to operate satisfactorily, a job that usually involves removing, brushing, and refitting the cutters and the head.
Silk. Garments made of silk usually require dry cleaning because
water and silk are often not compatible. However, there are some
silk garments that can tolerate washing in water. Be guided by
care labels. Some dyes used on silk will dissolve in water, causing
dye bleeding and dye transfer. Be sure to test multicolored articles
before washing.
Slow cookers. Avoid an abrasive cleaner or steel wool in favor of
a sponge, cloth, or nonscratching plastic scrubber. Cleanup is easiest if the appliance has a removable liner that can be immersed.
If the liner is not removable, takt: care not to wet any electrical
parts of the cooker.
Smoke detectors. To keep detectors operating properly, vacuum
them annually, cleaning with the vacuum wand from a full-

172

ApPENDIX A

powered canister cleaner, if possible. If a detector has a fixed
cover, pass the wand across the cover's openings. If a detector's
cover is removable, gently vacuum the sensor chambers.

Spots on glassware and dishes. This is a particularly annoying
problem in areas of the country that have hard water. Try addin~ a
rinse agent to your dishwashing machine. These products help to reduce spotting. Many dishwashers have dispensers for such additives.
Stainless steel cookware. For stubborn food reSidues, use a
commercial stainless steel cleaner.
Stainless steel flatware. Scratches or surface imperfections tend
to diminish the stain resistance of stainless steel tableware.
Consequently, flatware should not be cleaned with scouring powder or steel wool. It is advisable to wash stainless steel soon after
using it to minimize any possible staining.
Steam irons. Unpiug the iron and allow it to cool down before
cleaning. If an iron's soleplate has a nonstick finish, any adherent
starch or dirt should be removed easily by wiping with a damp
sponge. For an iron without a nonstick finish, clean with a mild
solution of hand dishwashing liquid and water. Avoid abrasives,
which could scratch the soleplate. Do not immerse the iron in
water.
Television sets and computer monitors. A television's screen
attracts fingerprints, but even more of a nuisance is its tendency to
accumulate dust and grime as a result of static electricity. With the
set turned off, use glass cleaner sparingly. Wet a rag or paper
towel with the cleaner rather than spraying it, to avoid getting
cleaner on the cabinet.

TIPS FOR CLEANING

173

Toasters, toaster ovens, toaster oven-broi1ers. Clean the crumbs
from these appliances often enough to prevent an accumulation
that will smolder. Too many crumbs may also impede the operation of door-opening mechanisms.
A "continuous-clean" interior is supposed to rid itself of grease
and grime at normal cooking temperatures. This doesn't seem to
work very well, however, although a continuous-clean finish's
dull, usually mottled surface may present a cleaner appearance for
a longer time than an ordinary finish will. In the long run, a con~
tinuous-clean finish may be something of a disadvantage since its
rough, soft surface eventually makes cleaning very difficult. It
doesn't hold up to scrubbing or to the use of harsh cleansers.
Vacuum cleaners. Clumps of dust or other debris can clog a vacuum cleaner's hose. One way to dislodge dirt is with a broom or
mop handle inserted into the hose, working carefully to prevent
puncturing the hose cover. Change the paper bag or clean the
cloth bag as soon as the cleaner's suction drops noticeably, even .
if the bag doesn't seem full. Small quantities of fine, dense dirt can
reduce a bag's efficiency and consequently a cleaner's suction.
Vaporizers. See Humidifiers.
VCR recording and playback heads. The picture generated by
a: VCR may begin to deteriorate over time. Replacing the heads can
be expensive. There is not much you can do about normal wear
resulting from the head spinning at high speed against the tape
and the tape moving past the head. Try to keep the machine as
free of dust as possible by covering it when the VCR is not in use
and by storing tapes where they aren't likely to gather a lot of dust
and debris. You might try a special VCR cleaning tape, cautiously
using it in strict accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. If

174

ApPENDIX A

the cleaning tape doesn't restore the picture, professional
ing may be necessary.

servi~­

Vinyl and vinyl-composition floors. Damp mop for day-to-day
cleaning.
Waffle makers. The bits of food that stick to nonstick grids can
be removed with a brush when the grids are cool. When you want
to wash away excess oil, dunk removable grids in a sinkful of
warm, sudsy water. (Never dunk the appliance itself.) Flat grids for
grilling usually require thorough cleaning-sometimes soaking~
to remove hamburger grease or sticky cheese. Many manufacturers recommend washing the grids by hand rather than · in a
dishwasher.
Washing machines. Follow the manufacturer's instructions for
cleaning underneath the agitator of Cleaning a lint filter. Sponge
off detergent accumulations from around the top of the machine.
Water heaters. Periodically drain off some hot water to keep sediment from accumulating at the bottom of the tank. In areas with
hard water, draining is best done every month. Where the water is
soft, every three or four months should be enough. Be aware that
sometimes after this is done, sediment ·gets caught in the drain
valve, which will leak.
Wooden work surfaces. Butcher blocks and other wooden work
surfaces used for food preparation should be cleaned after each
use. Use chlorine bleach to kill germs from raw foods such as
chicken, fish, and meat. Wash any surface that · touches these
foods. Then cover the surface for two minutes with a dilute solution of unscented chlorine bleich, rinse thoroughly, and air dry.

TIps

FOR CLEANING

175

Wood-handled utensils. Unless the manufacturer's instructions
say the utensil is dishwasher safe,it is better to hand wash it in
hot, soapy water and towel dry. Do not allow the utensil to soak
in the water. Doing so may damage the wood.
WooL Dry cleaning is the safest method, unless the item has a care
label stating that it is machine washable. If it says the wool can be
laundered, use only cool or cold water, and use minimum agitation and spinning to prevent shrinkage and matting of the wool
fibers. Do not use bleach.

AppendixB

STAIN REMOVAL
Quick action is often the key to success with stain removal. Many
a tie, blouse, carpet, or upholstery fabric has been saved by immediately treating the stain. Gather all of the materials mentioned
in the section entitled "Spot Removal Kit" (see p. 182) and keep
them in a place where you can locate them quickly. Be sure they
are out of the reach of children.
It is important to follow the garment, carpet, or furniture manufacturer's instructions as well as the cautions listed on the label
of any product used in the stain removal process. The process of
attempting to remove a stain may be unsuccessful and may, in
fact, set the stain, making it ·more difficult to remove. If you are
not sure if your attempt to remove a stain will cause damage, it
might be better to seek professional help (a dry cleaner or a professional carpet, drapery, or upholstery cleaning service). But it is
important to understand that even though professional cleaning
may do the trick, it too is not always a foolproof approach.
Professionals may not be able to remove some stains. Be sure ·the
professional you select evaluates the stain and the stained material, and informs you about any potential risks associated with attempting to remove the stain.

Cleaning procedures. The following procedures have been obtained from several sources, including the Association of Specialists in Cleaning and Restoration (ASCR International) and the
Carpet and Rug Institute (cru). Neither the editors nor the publisher can guarantee or be responsible for any results obtained by
using these procedures.
177

178

APPENDIX

B

Whether you plan to attempt stain removal yourself or use the
services of a professional, it is important to blot up all spills immediately using clean, white unprinted napkins or towels. You
may use cloth or paper for this purpose. However, if you decide
to use paper napkins or towels, first test them to be sure they will
be strong enough to do the job.
Do not scrub the area! Scrubbing can damage delicate fabrics or
carpet pile. Continue to blot with napkins or towels until the area
is completely dry. For semi-solids, gently scrape the residue up
with the edge of a rounded spoon. On carpets, solids should be
gently broken up and vacuumed until completely removed.
For any residual stain resulting from a spill or for stains that
have already had a chance to soak into the fabric and dry, locate
the substance that caused the stain in the stain removal steps section (see p. 184) and carefully follow the recommended cleaning
steps in the order shown.
Pretest each recommended cleaning agent on an inconspicuous
area of the soiled item (inside the flap that covers a Zipper, under
or in back of a couch cushion, the back of a tie, a section of carpet inside a closet, etc.) using the following pretest procedure. On
a multicolor fabric, conduct the test in a place where the different
colors meet, or be sure to test each of the colors.
• Apply several drops of the cleaning agent to the testing area.
• Hold a wet white doth on the testing area for 60 seconds. If
you can get to both -Sides, do the same on the underside of
the fabric.
• Examine the wet cloth for color transfer and the fabric or carpet for color change or damage. If any of these changes are
evident, try the next cleaning solution in the recommended sequence or seek professional help.

STAIN REMOVAL

179

If no damage or color change is evident from the pretest, you
may begin the cleaning process. Apply a small amount of the first
recommended cleaning agent to a white cloth or paper towel and
gently work it into the stained area. Problems can result from
working with large amounts of cleaning materials, even water. So
it is better to start with a small amount of cleaning agent and repeat the process as needed. Blot~o not rub or brush. Excessive
agitation can cause unSightly fabric or carpet pile distortion, which
may become permanent. Work from the outer edge of the stain toward the center. Repeat the procedure with additional clean white
cloths or paper towels until you can't transfer any more stain to
the cloth or towel. Do not proceed to the next recommended
cleaning agent until this is done. Be · patient! Complete stain removal may require repeating the same step several times. In many
cases it will not be necessary to use all of the recommended steps
to remove the stain.
If you have access to the back of the fabric on clothing, place
the front face on a white towel and work the cleaning agent into
the fabric from the back. Of course, this is not typically possible
when cleaning upholstery or carpets.
Some cleaning agents may promote rapid resoiling. For washable clothing, launder the garment as soon as possible after removing the stain. For fabrics or carpet materials that are water
safe, it is also important to rinse or wash the area after the stain
has been removed completely. During the process of rinsing,
avoid using excessive amounts of water on carpets and upholstery
fabrics. Use a mist-type sprayer to prevent overwetting. For those
nonwashable fabrics that will tolerate water, the treated fabric
should be damp-sponged with cool water to remove any residue
from the stain removal process. Check a garment's care label; if it
reads "Dry Clean Only," you may want to avoid using water-based

180

ApPENDIX

B

cleaning agents. Likewise,upholstery fabrics that carry a label with
an "S" (indicating that a solvent-based cleaner is required) or an
"X" (vacuuming only) should not be cleaned with any materials
that contain water. Occasionally, professional cleaners have special techniques to clean upholstery labeled "X." They usually
charge extra for this work. Upholstery cleaning codes are not
always attached to furniture: Check the underside of a chair or
sofa or look on the deck under the cushions.
After the stain is removed from a carpet or upholstery fabric and
the area has been rinsed, apply a thick pad of white cloth or paper
towels and weight them down to absorb the excess water or
cleaning material from the final cleaning step. Change pads as
needed until the area is thoroughly dry.
Consumers Union testers found that some of the more effective
laundry detergents (especially those with bleach or bleach alternative) were quite effective at removing stains caused by spaghetti
sauce, chocolate milk, and mud. Most could not remove motor oil.
WORm WRITING FOR

• Contact the Carpet and Rug Institute (P.O. Box 2048, Dalton, GA
30722, 800-882-8846) for a copy of their Carpet Spot Removal
Guide.
• If you have small children, c:ontact Binney & Smith, Inc., Consumer Communications (P.O. Box 431, Easton, PA 18044, 1-800CRAYOLA), for a copy of their Stain Removal Suggestions for
Crayola products.
• Write to ACR International 00830 Annapolis Junction Road,
Suite 312, Annapolis Junction, MD 2070l}. Enclose a legal-size
self-addressed stamped envelope for a copy of their carpet and
upholstery spot removal guide.
• Contact the Institute of Inspection, Cleaning and Restoration
Certification (800-835-4624) and the Association of Specialists in

STAIN REMOVAL

181

Cleaning and Restoration (800-272-7012) for listings of professional interior cleaners in your area.
OTHER ITEMS WORTH KEEPING AROUND

Baking soda. Can be used to neutralize acids (e.g., battery acid).
Bleach. Refer to the section on Bleaches in the Laundry chapter.
Hydrogen peroxide. The kind sold as an antiseptic (3 percent).
Petroleum jelly. Can be used to soften hardened paint, tar, and
rubber cement on washable fabrics. (Launder fabrics treated with
petroleum jelly immediately after application.)
Laundry booster. Refer to the section on Boosters in the Laundry
chapter.

182

APPENDIX

B

SPOT REMOVAL KIT
Use the recommended stain removal agents in the order indicated
in the following table.
Dry cleaning. Some examples of nonflammable dry cleaning fluid
are Afta and K2r. Use small amounts to avoid damage to sizing,
backing, or stuffing material. Apply only in a well-ventilated area
or-if possible--outdoors. (Note: The active ingredient in these
products is being phased out by the EPA. Consumers Union does
not know how the reformulated versions will perform.)
Detergent. (mild) Mix one teaspoon of a clear (not colored) hand
dishwashing liquid per one cup of lukewarm water. Hand dishwashing liquid residues can cause rapid resoiling, so rinse thoroughly after using. Never use laundry detergents on upholstery or
carpets because they contain optical brighteners that may discolor
the fibers or affect light and white colors.
Ammonia. Mix 1 tablespoon of household ammonia with '12 cup
of water.
Caution: Apply only in a well-ventilated area. Never mix
ammonia and bleach during any cleaning operation.

Vinegar (5 percent acetic acid solution). Mix y, cup of white
household vinegar with % cup of water.
Enzyme. To make an enzyme-containing detergent, mix a solution
of powdered ' enzyme-containing laundry detergent according to
the directionS on the box. Allow the solution to remain on the
stain for the length of time recommended ·by the manufacturer.
Caution: Do not use an enzyme detergent on nonwashable fabrics, especially wool, mohair, or silk.

183
AlcohoL (Rubbing) Seventy-percent alcohol is available in most
drug- and grocery stores.
STAIN REMOVAL

Caution: Rubbing alcohol is ignitable. Use in a wellventilated area, away from heat or flame, and store carefully.

Remover. Some nail polish removers contain acetone. Some may
contain amyl acetate. Amyl acetate is also used in paint, oil, and
grease (POG) removers (available in hardware stores). POG removers may leave residues that can cause rapid soiling. When
using a POG remover on upholstery and carpets,always blot the
area with a dry cleaning fluid, then rinse the area thoroughly with
warm water. (See cautions for overwetting on p. 180.)
Caution: Do not attempt to clean acetate or
triacetate fabrics with nail polish remover.
Acetone and amyl acetate are ignitable.

Water. Rinsing with water alone should be the last step of the
stain removal process. Do not overwet upholstery fabrics, carpets,
and nonwashable clothing. Use a moist towel or a mist-type
sprayer for gentle rinsing.
ProfessionaL A professional should be called if an item is especially important to you, if you are in doubt with regard to the best
stain removal method, or if there is a possibility that you'll damage the stained material. Professionals have the ability and the
equipment to use more aggressive cleaning solutions to remove
stubborn stains.
Vacuum. This is a handy .tool for picking up loose dry spills.
Caution: Do not use gasoline or lighter fluid.

184

APPENDIX

B

STAIN REMOVAL

185

FOR STAIN REMOVAL, EMPLOY THE FOLLOWING STEPS IN THE ORDER

PRESENIED (1=FIRST, 2=SECONDJ ETC.).

2

Blood

2

Candle wax

3

For washable clothing, pre.
soaking for several hours in cold
salt water may help. Full-strength
3% hydrogen peroxide may also
help. Note: All cleaning agents
should be used at room _
temperatl.He (not warm or hot).

3

4

1
(POG)

Use tt:Je reco":Jmended cleaning agents in the order indicated in the table. For
more information, see page 182.
Dry cleaning Nonflammable dry cleaning fluid. Detergent mild detergent.

=

=

Scrape excess wax off the fabric
before cleaning. For washable
clothing, pouring boiling water
through the fabric from a height
of 12 inches may help. For
nonwashables, sandwich the
fabric between paper towels and
use a warm iron.

Ammonia. Vinegar. Enzyme = Enzyme-containing detergent. Alcohol = Rubbing
alcohol. Remover = Nail polish or POG remover. Water. Professional = Call a
professional. Vacuum.

STAIN REMOVAL

3
Chewing gum

2

Use t~e recorrymended cleaning agents in the order indicated in the table. For
more Infol!flatlOn, see page 182.
Dry cleanmg = Nonflammable dry cleaning fluid. Detergent = mild detergent

187

Freeze the gum with ice and gently
break with a hammer to remove
before cleaning . You can also rub
about 12 tsp of full-strength liniment
(e.g., Ben-Gay) into the affected
area, heat the area with a hair
dryer, and wipe with polyethylene
squares. Follow with mild detergent
and a rinse. For washables,
softening the gum with peanut
butter followed by laundering might
facilitate removal. Caution: Peanut
butter can also stain. Pretest
before using this remedy.

Ammonia. Vinegar. Enzyme = Enzyme-containing detergent. Alcohol = Rubbing
alcohol. Remover = Nail polish or POG remover. Water. Professional = Call a
professional. Vacuum.

188

APPENDIX

Fruit & juices

B

STAIN REMOVAL

2

3

4

Use the recommended cleaning agents in the order indicated in the table. For
more information, see page 182.
. .
Dry cleaning = Nonflammable dry cleaning fluid. Detergent =mild detergent.

189

For
.'
clothing, pouring
boiling water through the fabric
from a height of 12 inches may .
help. C,onsumers Union testers
also found that several laundry
booster products helped the
removal of grape juice.

Ammonia. Vinegar. Enzyme = Enzyme~containing detergent. AI~ohol = Rubbing
alcohol. Remover = Nail polish or POG remover. Water. ProfessIonal =Call a
professional. Vacuum.

190

APPENDIX

B

Use the recommended cleaning agents in the order indicated in the table. For
more information, see page 182.
Dry cleaning Nonflammable dry cleaning fluid. Deterg.e nt mild detergent.

=

=

Ammonia. Vinegar. Enzyme = Enzyme-containing detergent. AI~ohol = Rubbing
alcohol. Remover = Nail polish or POG remover. Water. Professional =Call a
professional. Vacuum.

192

APPENDIX

B

Use trye reco":lmended cleaning agents in the order indicated in the table For
more Infor!llatlon, see page 182.
"

Dry cleaning = Nonflammable dry cleaning fluid. Detergent = mild detergent.

STAIN REMOVAL

=

=

193

Ammonia. Vinegar. Enzyme Enzyme-containing detergent. Alcohol Rubbing
alcohol. Remover = Nail polish or POG remove~. Water. Professional = Call a
professional. Vacuum.

194

APPENDIX

B

STAlNREMOVAL

Use the recommended cleaning agents in the order indicated i~ the table. For
more information. see page 182.
Dry cleaning Nonflammable dry cleaning fluid. Detergent mild detergent.

=

=

195

Ammonia. Vinegar. Enzyme = Enzyme-containing detergent. Alcohol = Rubbing
alcohol. Remover = Nail polish or POG remover. Water. ProfessIonal = Call a
professional. Vacuum.

196

APPENDIX

B

Use t~e recon:'mended cleaning agents in the order indicated in the table. For
more Information, see page 182.
.
Dry cleaning = Nonflammable dry cleaning fluid . Detergent =mild detergent.

Ammonia. Vinegar. Enzyme = Enzyme-containing detergent. Alcohol = Rubbing
alcohol. Remover = Nail polish or POG remover. Water. Professional = Call a
professional. Vacuum.

198

APPENDIX

B

In the restaurant, sprinkle fresh

Wine

2

3

4

Use the recommended cleaning agents in the order indicated in the table. For
more information, see page 182.
Dry cleaning = Nonflammable dry cleaning fluid. Detergent = mild detergent.

stains with Club soda. For red wine
spills, it might be beneficial to blot,
sprinkle on white wine, and blot
For washable clothing,
pouring boiling water through the
fabric from a height of 12 inches
may help.

Ammonia. Vinegar. Enzyme = Enzyme-containing detergent. Alcohol = Rubbing
alcohol. Remover = Nail polish or POG remover. Water. Professional = Call a
professional. Vacuum.

AppendixC

DISPOSAL OF HOUSEHOLD
CLEANING MATERIALS
The best way to dispose of a cleaning product is to use it up. If
you can't use it, try to find someone who can-give it away.
If either of these options is not feasible, check the label for recommendations regarding disposal. Some products may require
special handling.

Water-soluble products. Water-soluble cleaning products are
formulated to be treated in municipal sewage treatment plants or
household septic systems. Accordingly, products that do not recommend special handling can be poured down the drain. This includes all-purpose cleaners, bleaches, dishwashing and laundry
products, toilet bowl cleaners, and water-based metal cleaners and
polishes. Be sure to run copious amounts of water while discarding, and never mix cleaning products-certain combinations may
release dangerous fumes.
Solid cleaning products. Solid cleaning products~suchas soap
bars, rinse agents, soap pads, and toweldtes-should be disposed
of in the trash.
Solvent-based products. This category includes cleaning materials such as turpentine, mineral spirits, and other stuff used to clean
paint brushes; spot removers; some metal and furniture cleaners;
and any cleaning product labeled flammable. Solvent-based products should be disposed of in the same manner as household haz-

201

202

ApPENDIX

C

ardous waste. Contact your municipality for local procedures, or
call the manufacturer's telephone number-found 6n some product labels.
Do not flush solvent-based wastes down the toilet; do not pour
them down a .storm drain; do not dump them in a ditch, in your
backyard, or in a vacant lot; and do not throw them out with the
trash. If you store hazardous cleaning materials in anticipation of
a collection day, keep them in well-ventilated racks, out of the
reach of children and animals. Store them in the original container,
tightly sealed, and kept dry. If a container begins to leak, place it
in a larger intact container of similar material.

Household Hazardous Waste Collection Centers
Many municipalities have some type of household hazardous
waste drop-off center. These services may be permanent or they
may open periodically-several days per week, one or two days
a year, or anything in between. Each center should list the specific
types of waste it will and won't accept. Commonly, centers accept
such items as cirain cleaners, solvent-based cleaning products,
paints, paint strippers, pesticides, batteries, gasoline, motor oil,
charcoal lighter fluid, solvents, etc. Most do not accept banned
chemicals such as PCBs, chlordane, and radioactive waste . .Call
your local sanitation authority for center locations and collection
schedules.
Some communities may not accept empty containers from
such products as bleach, toilet bowl cleaner; oven cleaner, and the
like, either for recycling or regular trash collection. These containers may also have to go to the household hazardous waste
collection site.